The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Light Shines in Darkness, by Leo Tolstoy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Light Shines in Darkness

Author: Leo Tolstoy

Translator: Louise Maude
            Aylmer Maude

Release Date: September 20, 2008 [EBook #26666]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIGHT SHINES IN DARKNESS ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  [ Transcriber's Note:
    This e-book belongs to Tolstoy's Plays (Complete Edition). The
    front matter, including the table of contents, can be found in
    e-book #26660; it lists the other plays in the collection.

    Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
    possible; changes (corrections of spelling and punctuation) made to
    the original text are listed at the end of this file.
  ]




                      THE LIGHT SHINES IN DARKNESS

                                 DRAMA




CHARACTERS


NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH SARÝNTSOV.

MARY IVÁNOVNA SARÝNTSOVA. His wife.

LYÚBA. Their daughter.

STYÓPA. Their son.

VÁNYA. A younger son.

MISSY. Their daughter.

THE SARÝNTSOVS' LITTLE CHILDREN.

ALEXANDER MIKÁYLOVICH STARKÓVSKY. (Lyúba's betrothed in Act IV).

MITROFÁN ERMÍLYCH. Ványa's tutor.

THE SARÝNTSOVS' GOVERNESS.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA KÓHOVTSEVA. Mary Ivánovna's sister.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH KÓHOVTSEV. Her husband.

LISA. Their daughter.

PRINCESS CHEREMSHÁNOV.

BORÍS. Her son.

TÓNYA. Her daughter.

A YOUNG PRIEST.

THE SARÝNTSOVS' NURSE.

THE SARÝNTSOVS' MEN-SERVANTS.

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. A peasant.

A PEASANT WOMAN. His wife.

MALÁSHKA. His daughter (carrying her baby-brother).

PETER. A peasant.

A RURAL POLICEMAN.

FATHER GERÁSIM. A priest.

A NOTARY.

A CARPENTER.

A GENERAL.

HIS ADJUTANT.

A COLONEL.

A REGIMENTAL CLERK.

A SENTINEL.

TWO SOLDIERS.

A GENDARME OFFICER.

HIS CLERK.

THE CHAPLAIN OF THE REGIMENT.

THE CHIEF DOCTOR IN A MILITARY ASYLUM.

AN ASSISTANT DOCTOR.

WARDERS.

AN INVALID OFFICER.

PIANIST.

COUNTESS.

ALEXANDER PETRÓVICH.

PEASANT MEN AND WOMEN, STUDENTS, LADIES, DANCING COUPLES.




                      THE LIGHT SHINES IN DARKNESS




ACT I


SCENE 1

    The scene represents the verandah of a fine country-house, in front
    of which a croquet-lawn and tennis-court are shown, also a
    flower-bed. The children are playing croquet with their governess.
    Mary Ivánovna Sarýntsova, a handsome elegant woman of forty; her
    sister, Alexándra Ivánovna Kóhovtseva, a stupid, determined woman of
    forty-five; and her husband, Peter Semyónovich Kóhovtsef, a fat
    flabby man, dressed in a summer suit, with a pince-nez, are sitting
    on the verandah at a table with a samovár and coffee-pot. Mary
    Ivánovna Sarýntsova, Alexándra Ivánovna Kóhovtseva, and Peter
    Semyónovich Kóhovtsev are drinking coffee, and the latter is
    smoking.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. If you were not my sister, but a stranger, and
Nicholas Ivánovich not your husband, but merely an acquaintance, I
should think all this very original, and perhaps I might even encourage
him, _J'aurais trouvé tout ça très gentil_;[1] but when I see that
_your_ husband is playing the fool--yes, simply playing the fool--then I
can't help telling you what I think about it. And I shall tell your
husband, Nicholas, too. _Je lui dirai son fait, ma chère._[2] I am not
afraid of anyone.

  [1] I should have considered it all very pretty.

  [2] I will tell him the plain fact, my dear.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I don't feel the least bit hurt; don't I see it all
myself? but I don't think it so very important.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. No. You don't think so, but I tell you that, if you
let it go on, you will be beggared. _Du train que cela va ..._[3]

  [3] At the rate things are going.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Come! Beggared indeed! Not with an income like
theirs.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Yes, beggared! And please don't interrupt me, my
dear! Anything a _man_ does always seems right to you!

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Oh! I don't know. I was saying----

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. But you never do know what you are saying, because
when you men begin playing the fool, _il n'y a pas de raison que ça
finisse_.[4] I am only saying that if I were in your place, I should not
allow it. _J'aurais mis bon ordre à toutes ces lubies._[5] What does it
all mean? A husband, the head of a family, has no occupation, abandons
everything, gives everything away, _et fait le généreux à droite et à
gauche_.[6] I know how it will end! _Nous en savons quelque chose._[7]

  [4] There is no reason for it to stop.

  [5] I should put an end to all these fads.

  [6] And plays the bountiful left and right.

  [7] We know something about it.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH [to Mary Ivánovna]. But do explain to me, Mary, what
is this new movement? Of course I understand Liberalism, County
Councils, the Constitution, schools, reading-rooms, and _tout ce qui
s'en suit_;[8] as well as Socialism, strikes, and an eight-hour day; but
what is this? Explain it to me.

  [8] All the rest of it.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But he told you about it yesterday.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. I confess I did not understand. The Gospels, the
Sermon on the Mount--and that churches are unnecessary! But then how is
one to pray, and all that?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes. That is the worst of it. He would destroy
everything, and give us nothing in its place.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. How did it begin?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. It began last year, after his sister died. He was very
fond of her, and her death had a very great effect on him. He became
quite morose, and was always talking about death; and then, you know, he
fell ill himself with typhus. When he recovered, he was quite a changed
man.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. But, all the same, he came in spring to see us again
in Moscow, and was very nice, and played bridge. _Il était très gentil
et comme tout le monde._[9]

  [9] He was very nice, and like everybody else.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But, all the same, he was then quite changed.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. In what way?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. He was completely indifferent to his family, and purely
and simply had _l'idée fixe_. He read the Gospels for days on end, and
did not sleep. He used to get up at night to read, made notes and
extracts, and then began going to see bishops and hermits--consulting
them about religion.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And did he fast, or prepare for communion?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. From the time of our marriage--that's twenty years
ago--till then he had never fasted nor taken the sacrament, but at that
time he did once take the sacrament in a monastery, and then immediately
afterwards decided that one should neither take communion nor go to
church.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. That's what I say--thoroughly inconsistent!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, a month before, he would not miss a single service,
and kept every fast-day; and then he suddenly decided that it was all
unnecessary. What can one do with such a man?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I have spoken and will speak to him again.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Yes! But the matter is of no great importance.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. No? Not to you! Because you men have no religion.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Do let me speak. I say that that is not the point.
The point is this: if he denies the Church, what does he want the
Gospels for?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Well, so that we should live according to the Gospels and
the Sermon on the Mount, and give everything away.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. But how is one to live if one gives everything away?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And where has he found in the Sermon on the Mount
that we must shake hands with footmen? It says "Blessed are the meek,"
but it says nothing about shaking hands!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, of course, he gets carried away, as he always used
to. At one time it was music, then shooting, then the school. But that
doesn't make it any the easier for me!

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Why has he gone to town to-day?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. He did not tell me, but I know it is about some trees of
ours that have been felled. The peasants have been cutting trees in our
wood.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. In the pine-tree plantation?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, they will probably be sent to prison and ordered to
pay for the trees. Their case was to be heard to-day, he told me of it,
so I feel certain that is what he has gone about.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. He will pardon them, and to-morrow they will come to
take the trees in the park.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, that is what it leads to. As it is, they break our
apple-trees and tread down the green cornfields, and he forgives them
everything.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Extraordinary!

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. That is just why I say that it must not be allowed
to go on. Why, if it goes on like that, _tout y passera_.[10] I think it
is your duty as a mother to _prendre tes mesures_.[11]

  [10] Everything will be lost.

  [11] To take measures.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. What can I do?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. What indeed! Stop him! Explain to him that this
cannot go on. You have your children! What sort of an example is it for
them?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Of course, it is hard; but I go on bearing it, and hoping
it will pass, like his former infatuations.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Yes, but "_Aide toi et Dieu t'aidera!_"[12] You must
make him feel that he has not only himself to think of, and that one
can't live like that.

  [12] God helps those who help themselves.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. The worst of all is that he no longer troubles about the
children, and I have to decide everything myself. I have an unweaned
baby, besides the older children: girls and boys, who have to be looked
after, and need guidance. And I have to do it all single-handed. He used
to be such an affectionate and attentive father, but now he seems no
longer to care. Yesterday I told him that Ványa is not studying
properly, and will not pass his exam., and he replied that it would be
by far the best thing for him to leave school altogether.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. To go where?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Nowhere! That's the most terrible thing about it;
everything we do is wrong, but he does not say what would be right.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. That's odd.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. What is there odd about it? It is just _your_ usual
way. Condemn everything, and do nothing yourself!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Styópa has now finished at the University, and ought to
choose a career; but his father says nothing about it. He wanted to take
a post in the Civil Service, but Nicholas Ivánovich says he ought not to
do so. Then he thought of entering the Horse-Guards, but Nicholas
Ivánovich quite disapproved. Then the lad asked his father: "What am I
to do then--not go and plough after all?" and Nicholas Ivánovich said:
"Why not plough? It is much better than being in a Government Office."
So what was he to do? He comes to me and asks, and I have to decide
everything, and yet the authority is all in his hands.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Well, you should tell him so straight out.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. So I must! I shall have to talk to him.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And tell him straight out that you can't go on like
this. That you do your duty, and he must do his; or if not--let him hand
everything over to you.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. It is all so unpleasant!

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I will tell him, if you like. _Je lui dirai son
fait._[13]

  [13] I'll tell him the truth.

    Enter a young priest, confused and agitated. He carries a book, and
    shakes hands all round.

PRIEST. I have come to see Nicholas Ivánovich. I have, in fact, come to
return a book.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. He has gone to town, but will be back soon.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. What book are you returning?

PRIEST. Oh, it's Mr. Renan's _Life of Jesus_.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Dear me! What books you read!

PRIEST [much agitated, lights a cigarette] It was Nicholas Ivánovich
gave it to me to read.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA [contemptuously] Nicholas Ivánovich gave it you! And
do you agree with Nicholas Ivánovich and Mr. Renan?

PRIEST. No, of course not. If I really did agree, I should not, in fact,
be what is called a servant of the Church.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. But if you are, as it is called, a faithful servant
of the Church, why don't you convert Nicholas Ivánovich?

PRIEST. Everyone, in fact, has his own views on these matters, and
Nicholas Ivánovich really maintains much that is quite true, only he
goes astray, in fact, on the main point, the Church.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA [contemptuously] And what are the many things that
Nicholas Ivánovich maintains that are quite true? Is it true that the
Sermon on the Mount bids us give our property away to strangers and let
our own families go begging?

PRIEST. The Church, in fact, sanctions the family, and the Holy Fathers
of the Church, in fact, blessed the family; but the highest perfection
really demands the renunciation of worldly advantages.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Of course the Anchorites acted so, but ordinary
mortals, I should imagine, should act in an ordinary way, as befits all
good Christians.

PRIEST. No one can tell unto what he may be called.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And, of course, you are married?

PRIEST. Oh yes.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And have you any children?

PRIEST. Two.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Then why don't you renounce worldly advantages, and
not go about smoking a cigarette?

PRIEST. Because of my weakness, in fact, my unworthiness.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Ah! I see that instead of bringing Nicholas
Ivánovich to reason, you support him. That, I tell you straight out, is
wrong!

    Enter Nurse.

NURSE. Don't you hear baby crying? Please come to nurse him.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I'm coming, coming! [Rises and exit].

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I'm dreadfully sorry for my sister. I see how she
suffers. Seven children, one of them unweaned, and then all these fads
to put up with. It seems to me quite plain that he has something wrong
here [touching her forehead. To Priest] Now tell me, I ask you, what new
religion is this you have discovered?

PRIEST. I don't understand, in fact ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Oh, please don't beat about the bush. You know very
well what I am asking you about.

PRIEST. But allow me ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I ask you, what creed is it that bids us shake hands
with every peasant and let them cut down the trees, and give them money
for vódka, and abandon our own families?

PRIEST. I don't know that ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. He says it is Christianity. You are a priest of the
Orthodox Greek Church, and therefore you must know and must say whether
Christianity bids us encourage robbery.

PRIEST. But I ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Or else, why are you a priest, and why do you wear
long hair and a cassock?

PRIEST. But we are not asked ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Not asked, indeed! Why, I am asking you! He told me
yesterday that the Gospels say, "Give to him that asketh of thee." But
then in what sense is that meant?

PRIEST. In its plain sense, I suppose.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And I think not in the plain sense; we have always
been taught that everybody's position is appointed by God.

PRIEST. Of course, but yet ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Oh, yes. It's just as I was told; you take his side,
and that is wrong! I say so straight out. If some young school teacher,
or some young lad, lickspittles to him, it's bad enough--but you, in
your position, should remember the responsibility that rests on you.

PRIEST. I try to ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. What sort of religion is it, when he does not go to
church, and does not believe in the sacraments? And instead of bringing
him to his senses, you read Renan with him, and interpret the Gospels in
a way of your own.

PRIEST [excitedly] I cannot answer. I am, in fact, upset, and will hold
my tongue.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Oh! If only I were your Bishop; I'd teach you to
read Renan and smoke cigarettes.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. _Mais cessez, au nom du ciel. De quel droit?_[14]

  [14] But do stop, for heaven's sake. What right have you?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Please don't teach me. I am sure the Reverend Father
is not angry with me. What if I have spoken plainly. It would have been
worse had I bottled up my anger. Isn't that so?

PRIEST. Forgive me if I have not expressed myself as I should.
[Uncomfortable pause].

    Enter Lyúba and Lisa. Lyúba, Mary Ivánovna's daughter, is a handsome
    energetic girl of twenty. Lisa, Alexándra Ivánovna's daughter, is a
    little older. Both have kerchiefs on their heads, and are carrying
    baskets, to go gathering mushrooms. They greet Alexándra Ivánovna,
    Peter Semyónovich, and the priest.

LYÚBA. Where is Mamma?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Just gone to the baby.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Now mind you bring back plenty of mushrooms. A little
village girl brought some lovely white ones this morning. I'd go with
you myself, but it's too hot.

LISA. Do come, Papa!

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Yes, go, for you are getting too fat.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Well, perhaps I will, but I must first fetch some
cigarettes. [Exit].

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Where are all the young ones?

LYÚBA. Styópa is cycling to the station, the tutor has gone to town with
papa. The little ones are playing croquet, and Ványa is out there in the
porch, playing with the dogs.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Well, has Styópa decided on anything?

LYÚBA. Yes. He has gone himself to hand in his application to enter the
Horse-Guards. He was horribly rude to papa yesterday.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Of course, it's hard on him too.... _Il n'y a pas de
patience qui tienne._[15] The young man must begin to live, and he is
told to go and plough!

  [15] There are limits to human endurance.

LYÚBA. That's not what papa told him; he said ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Never mind. Still Styópa must begin life, and
whatever he proposes, it's all objected to. But here he is himself.

    The Priest steps aside, opens a book, and begins to read. Enter
    Styópa cycling towards the verandah.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. _Quand on parle du soleil on en voit les
rayons._[16] We were just talking about you. Lyúba says you were rude to
your father.

  [16] Speak of the sun and you see its rays.

STYÓPA. Not at all. There was nothing particular. He gave me his
opinion, and I gave him mine. It is not my fault that our views differ.
Lyúba, you know, understands nothing, but must have her say about
everything.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Well, and what have you decided on?

STYÓPA. I don't know what Papa has decided. I'm afraid he does not quite
know himself; but as for me, I have decided to volunteer for the
Horse-Guards. In our house some special objection is made to every step
that is taken; but this is all quite simple. I have finished my studies,
and must serve my time. To enter a line regiment and serve with tipsy
low-class officers would be unpleasant, and so I'm entering the
Horse-Guards, where I have friends.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Yes; but why won't your father agree to it?

STYÓPA. Papa! What is the good of talking about him? He is now possessed
by his _idée fixe_.[17] He sees nothing but what he wants to see. He
says military service is the basest kind of employment, and that
therefore one should not serve, and so he won't give me any money.

  [17] Fixed idea.

LISA. No! Styópa. He did not say that! You know I was present. He says
that if you cannot avoid serving, you should go when you are called; but
that to volunteer, is to choose that kind of service of your own free
will.

STYÓPA. But it's I, not he, who is going to serve. He himself was in the
army!

LISA. Yes, but he does not exactly say that he will not give you the
money; but that he cannot take part in an affair that is contrary to his
convictions.

STYÓPA. Convictions have nothing to do with it. One must serve--and
that's all!

LISA. I only say what I heard.

STYÓPA. I know you always agree with Papa. Do you know, Aunt, that Lisa
takes Papa's side entirely in everything?

LISA. What is true ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Don't I know that Lisa always takes up with any kind
of nonsense. She scents nonsense. _Elle flaire cela de loin._[18]

  [18] She scents it from afar.

    Enter Ványa running in with a telegram in his hand, followed by the
    dogs. He wears a red shirt.

VÁNYA [to Lyúba]. Guess who is coming?

LYÚBA. What's the use of guessing? Give it here [stretching towards him.
Ványa does not let her have the telegram].

VÁNYA. I'll not give it you, and I won't say who it is from. It's
someone who makes you blush!

LYÚBA. Nonsense! Who is the telegram from?

VÁNYA. There, you're blushing! Aunty, she is blushing, isn't she?

LYÚBA. What nonsense! Who is it from? Aunty, who is it from?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. The Cheremshánovs.

LYÚBA. Ah!

VÁNYA. There you are! Why are you blushing?

LYÚBA. Let me see the telegram, Aunt. [Reads] "Arriving all three by the
mail train. Cheremshánovs." That means the Princess, Borís, and Tónya.
Well, I am glad!

VÁNYA. There you are, you're glad! Styópa, look how she is blushing.

STYÓPA. That's enough--teasing over and over again.

VÁNYA. Of course, because you're sweet on Tónya! You'd better cast lots;
for two men must not marry one another's sisters.[19]

  [19] In Russia the relationships that are set up by marriage debar a
  marriage between a woman's brother-in-law and her sister.

STYÓPA. Don't humbug! Shut up! How often have you been told to?

LISA. If they are coming by the mail train, they will be here directly.

LYÚBA. That's true, so we can't go for mushrooms.

    Enter Peter Semyónovich with his cigarettes.

LYÚBA. Uncle Peter, we are not going!

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Why not?

LYÚBA. The Cheremshánovs are coming directly. Better let's play tennis
till they come. Styópa, will you play?

STYÓPA. I may as well.

LYÚBA. Ványa and I against you and Lisa. Agreed? Then I'll get the balls
and call the boys. [Exit].

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. So I'm to stay here after all!

PRIEST [preparing to go]. My respects to you.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. No, wait a bit, Father. I want to have a talk with
you. Besides, Nicholas Ivánovich will be here directly.

PRIEST [sits down, and lights another cigarette]. He may be a long time.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. There, someone is coming. I expect it's he.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Which Cheremshánova is it? Can it be Golitzin's
daughter?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Yes, of course. It's the Cheremshánova who lived in
Rome with her aunt.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Dear me, I shall be glad to see her. I have not met
her since those days in Rome when she used to sing duets with me. She
sang beautifully. She has two children, has she not?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Yes, they are coming too.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. I did not know that they were so intimate with the
Sarýntsovs.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Not intimate, but they lodged together abroad last
year, and I believe that _la princesse a des vues sur Lyúba pour son
fils. C'est une fine mouche, elle flaire une jolie dot._[20]

  [20] The princess has her eye on Lyúba for her son. She is a knowing
  one, and scents a nice dowry.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. But the Cheremshánovs themselves were rich.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. They _were_. The prince is still living, but he has
squandered everything, drinks, and has quite gone to the dogs. She
petitioned the Emperor, left her husband, and so managed to save a few
scraps. But she has given her children a splendid education. _Il faut
lui rendre cette justice._[21] The daughter is an admirable musician;
and the son has finished the University, and is charming. Only I don't
think Mary is quite pleased. Visitors are inconvenient just now. Ah!
here comes Nicholas.

  [21] One must do her that much justice.

    Enter Nicholas Ivánovich.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. How d'you do, Alína;[22] and you, Peter Semyónovich.
[To the Priest] Ah! Vasíly Nikanórych. [Shakes hands with them].

  [22] Alína is an abbreviation, and a pet name, for Alexándra.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. There is still some coffee left. Shall I give you a
cup? It's rather cold, but can easily be warmed up. [Rings].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No, thank you. I have had something. Where is Mary?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Feeding Baby.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Is she quite well?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Pretty well. Have you done your business?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I have. Yes. If there _is_ any tea or coffee left, I
will have some. [To Priest] Ah! you've brought the book back. Have you
read it? I've been thinking about you all the way home.

    Enter man-servant, who bows. Nicholas Ivánovich shakes hands with
    him. Alexándra Ivánovna shrugs her shoulders, exchanging glances
    with her husband.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Re-heat the samovár, please.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That's not necessary, Alína. I don't really want
any, and I'll drink it as it is.

    Missy, on seeing her father, leaves her croquet, runs to him, and
    hangs round his neck.

MISSY. Papa! Come with me.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [caressing her]. Yes, I'll come directly. Just let me
eat something first. Go and play, and I'll soon come.

    Exit Missy.

    Nicholas Ivánovich sits down to the table, and eats and drinks
    eagerly.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Well, were they sentenced?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes! They were. They themselves pleaded guilty. [To
Priest] I thought you would not find Renan very convincing ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And you did not approve of the verdict?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [vexed]. Of course I don't approve of it. [To Priest]
The main question for you is not Christ's divinity, or the history of
Christianity, but the Church ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Then how was it? _They_ confessed their guilt, _et
vous leur avez donné un démenti_?[23] They did not steal them--but only
took the wood?

  [23] And you contradicted them.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [who had begun talking to the priest, turns
resolutely to Alexándra Ivánovna]. Alína, my dear, do not pursue me with
pinpricks and insinuations.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. But not at all ...

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. And if you really want to know why I can't prosecute
the peasants about the wood they needed and cut down ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I should think they also need this samovár.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, if you want me to tell you why I can't agree
with those people being shut up in prison, and being totally ruined,
because they cut down ten trees in a forest which is considered to be
mine ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Considered so by everybody.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Oh dear! Disputing again.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Even if I considered that forest mine, which I
cannot do, we have 3000 acres of forest, with about 150 trees to the
acre. In all, about 450,000 trees--is that correct? Well, they have cut
down ten trees--that is, one 45-thousandth part. Now is it worth while,
and can one really decide, to tear a man away from his family and put
him in prison for that?

STYÓPA. Ah! but if you don't hold on to this one 45-thousandth, all the
other 44,990 trees will very soon be cut down also.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. But I only said _that_ in answer to your aunt. In
reality I have no right to this forest. Land belongs to everyone; or
rather, it can't belong to anyone. We have never put any labour into
this land.

STYÓPA. No, but you saved money and preserved this forest.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. How did I get my savings? What enabled me to save
up? And I didn't preserve the forest myself! However, this is a matter
which can't be proved to anyone who does not himself feel ashamed when
he strikes at another man--

STYÓPA. But no one is striking anybody!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Just as when a man feels no shame at taking toll
from others' labour without doing any work himself, you cannot prove to
him that he ought to be ashamed; and the object of all the Political
Economy you learnt at the University is merely to justify the false
position in which we live.

STYÓPA. On the contrary; science destroys all prejudices.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. However, all this is of no importance to me. What is
important is that in Yefím's[24] place I should have acted as he did,
and I should have been desperate had I been imprisoned. And as I wish to
do to others as I wish them to do to me--I cannot condemn him, but do
what I can to save him.

  [24] Yefím was the peasant who had cut down the tree.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. But, if one goes on that line, one cannot possess
anything.

    Alexándra Ivánovna and Styópa--

    Both speak together

  { ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Then it is much more profitable to steal than to
  { work.
  {
  { STYÓPA. You never reply to one's arguments. I say that a man who
  { saves, has a right to enjoy his savings.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [smiling] I don't know which I am to reply to. [To
Peter Semyónovich] It's true. One should not possess anything.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. But if one should not possess anything, one can't
have any clothes, nor even a crust of bread, but must give away
everything, so that it's impossible to live.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. And it should be impossible to live as we do!

STYÓPA. In other words, we must die! Therefore, that teaching is unfit
for life....

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No. It is given just that men may live. Yes. One
should give everything away. Not only the forest we do not use and
hardly ever see, but even our clothes and our bread.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. What! And the children's too?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes, the children's too. And not only our bread, but
ourselves. Therein lies the whole teaching of Christ. One must strive
with one's whole strength to give oneself away.

STYÓPA. That means to die.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes, even if you gave your life for your friends,
that would be splendid both for you and for others. But the fact is that
man is not solely a spirit, but a spirit within a body; and the flesh
draws him to live for itself, while the spirit of light draws him to
live for God and for others: and the life in each of us is not solely
animal, but is equipoised between the two. But the more it is a life for
God, the better; and the animal will not fail to take care of itself.

STYÓPA. Why choose a middle course: an equipoise between the two? If it
is right to do so--why not give away everything and die?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That would be splendid. Try to do it, and it will be
well both for you and for others.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. No, that is not clear, not simple. _C'est tiré par
les cheveux._[25]

  [25] It's too fine spun.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, I can't help it, and it can't be explained by
argument. However, that is enough.

STYÓPA. Yes, quite enough, and I also don't understand it. [Exit].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [turns to Priest] Well, what impression did the book
make on you?

PRIEST [agitated] How shall I put it? Well, the historic part is
insufficiently worked out, and it is not fully convincing, or let us
say, quite reliable; because the materials are, as a matter of fact,
insufficient. Neither the Divinity of Christ, nor His lack of Divinity,
can be proved historically; there is but one irrefragable proof....

    During this conversation first the ladies and then Peter Semyónovich
    go out.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. You mean the Church?

PRIEST. Well, of course, the Church, and the evidence, let's say, of
reliable men--the Saints for instance.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Of course, it would be excellent if there existed a
set of infallible people to confide in. It would be very desirable; but
its desirability does not prove that they exist!

PRIEST. And I believe that just _that is_ the proof. The Lord could not
in fact have exposed His law to the possibility of mutilation or
misinterpretation, but must in fact have left a guardian of His truth to
prevent that truth being mutilated.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Very well; but we first tried to prove the truth
itself, and now we are trying to prove the reliability of the guardian
of the truth.

PRIEST. Well here, as a matter of fact, we require faith.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Faith--yes, we need faith. We can't do without
faith. Not, however, faith in what other people tell us, but faith in
what we arrive at ourselves, by our own thought, our own reason ...
faith in God, and in true and everlasting life.

PRIEST. Reason may deceive. Each of us has a different mind.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [hotly] There, that is the most terrible blasphemy!
God has given us just one sacred tool for finding the truth--the only
thing that can unite us all, and we do not trust it!

PRIEST. How can we trust in it, when there are contradictions?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Where are the contradictions? That twice two are
four; and that one should not do to others what one would not like
oneself; and that everything has a cause? Truths of that kind we all
acknowledge because they accord with all our reason. But that God
appeared on Mount Sinai to Moses, or that Buddha flew up on a sunbeam,
or that Mahomet went up into the sky, and that Christ flew there
also--on matters of that kind we are all at variance.

PRIEST. No, we are not at variance, those of us who abide in the truth
are all united in one faith in God, Christ.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No, even there, you are not united, but have all
gone asunder; so why should I believe you rather than I would believe a
Buddhist Lama? Only because I happened to be born in your faith?

[The tennis players dispute] "Out!" "Not out!"

VÁNYA. I saw it ...:

    During the conversation, men-servants set the table again for tea
    and coffee.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. You say the Church unites. But, on the contrary, the
worst dissensions have always been caused by the Church. "How often
would I have gathered you as a hen gathers her chickens." ...

PRIEST. That was until Christ. But Christ did gather them all together.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes, Christ united; but we have divided: because we
have understood him the wrong way round. He destroyed all Churches.

PRIEST. Did he not say: "Go, tell the Church."

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. It is not a question of words! Besides those words
don't refer to what we call "Church." It is the spirit of the teaching
that matters. Christ's teaching is universal, and includes all
religions, and does not admit of anything exclusive; neither of the
Resurrection nor the Divinity of Christ, nor the Sacraments--nor of
anything that divides.

PRIEST. That, as a matter of fact, if I may say so, is your own
interpretation of Christ's teaching. But Christ's teaching is all
founded on His Divinity and Resurrection.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That's what is so dreadful about the Churches. They
divide by declaring that they possess the full indubitable and
infallible truth. They say: "It has pleased us and the Holy Ghost." That
began at the time of the first Council of the Apostles. They then began
to maintain that they had the full and _exclusive_ truth. You see, if I
say there is a God: the first cause of the Universe, everyone can agree
with me; and _such_ an acknowledgment of God will unite us; but if I say
there is a God: Brahma, or Jehovah, or a Trinity, such a God divides us.
Men wish to unite, and to that end devise all means of union, but
neglect the one indubitable means of union--the search for truth! It is
as if people in an enormous building, where the light from above shone
down into the centre, tried to unite in groups around lamps in different
corners, instead of going towards the central light, where they would
naturally all be united.

PRIEST. And how are the people to be guided--without any really definite
truth?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That's what is terrible! Each _one_ of us has to
save _his own_ soul, and has to do God's work _himself_, but instead of
that we busy ourselves saving _other people_ and teaching _them_. And
what do we teach them? We teach them now, at the end of the nineteenth
century, that God created the world in six days, then caused a flood,
and put all the animals in an ark, and all the rest of the horrors and
nonsense of the Old Testament. And then that Christ ordered everyone to
be baptized with water; and we make them believe in all the absurdity
and meanness of an Atonement essential to salvation; and then that he
rose up into the heavens which do not really exist, and there sat down
at the right hand of the Father. We have got used to all this, but
really it is dreadful! A child, fresh and ready to receive all that is
good and true, asks us what the world is, and what its laws are; and we,
instead of revealing to him the teaching of love and truth that has been
given to us, carefully ram into his head all sorts of horrible
absurdities and meannesses, ascribing them all to God. Is that not
terrible? It is as great a crime as man can commit. And we--you and your
Church--do this! Forgive me!

PRIEST. Yes, if one looks at Christ's teaching from a rationalistic
point of view, it is so.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Whichever way one looks, it is so. [Pause].

    Enter Alexándra Ivánovna. Priest bows to take his leave.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Good-bye, Father. He will lead you astray. Don't you
listen to him.

PRIEST. No. Search the Scriptures! The matter is too important, as a
matter of fact, to be--let's say--neglected. [Exit].

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Really, Nicholas, you have no pity on him! Though he
is a priest, he is still only a boy, and can have no firm convictions or
settled views....

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Give him time to settle down and petrify in
falsehood? No! Why should I? Besides, he is a good, sincere man.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. But what will become of him if he believes you?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. He need not believe _me_. But if he saw the truth,
it would be well for him and for everybody.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. If it were really so good, everyone would be ready
to believe you. As it is, no one believes you, and your wife least of
all. She _can't_ believe you.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Who told you that?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Well, just you try and explain it to her! She will
never understand, nor shall I, nor anyone else in the world, that one
must care for other people and abandon one's own children. Go and try to
explain that to Mary!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes, and Mary will certainly understand. Forgive me,
Alexándra, but if it were not for other people's influence, to which she
is very susceptible, she would understand me and go with me.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. To beggar your children for the sake of drunken
Yefím and his sort? Never! But if I have made you angry, please forgive
me. I can't help speaking out.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I am not angry. On the contrary, I am even glad you
have spoken out and given me the opportunity--challenged me--to explain
to Mary my whole outlook on life. On my way home to-day I was thinking
of doing so, and I will speak to her at once; and you will see that she
will agree, because she is wise and good.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Well, as to that, allow me to have my doubts.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. But I have no doubts. For you know, this is not any
invention of my own; it is only what we all of us know, and what Christ
revealed to us.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Yes, you think Christ revealed this, but I think he
revealed something else.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. It cannot be anything else.

    Shouts from the tennis ground.

LYÚBA. Out!

VÁNYA. No, we saw it.

LISA. I know. It fell just here!

LYÚBA. Out! Out! Out!

VÁNYA. It's not true.

LYÚBA. For one thing, it's rude to say "It's not true."

VÁNYA. And it's rude to say what is not true!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Just wait a bit, and don't argue, but listen. Isn't
it true that at any moment we may die, and either cease to exist, or go
to God who expects us to live according to His will?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Well?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, what can I do in this life other than what the
supreme judge in my soul, my conscience--God--requires of me? And my
conscience--God--requires that I should regard everybody as equal, love
everybody, serve everybody.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Your own children too?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Naturally, my own too, but obeying all that my
conscience demands. Above all, that I should understand that my life
does not belong to me--nor yours to you--but to God, who sent us into
the world and who requires that we should do His will. And His will
is ...

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And you think that you will persuade Mary of this?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Certainly.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. And that she will give up educating the children
properly, and will abandon them? Never!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Not only will she understand, but you too will
understand that it is the only thing to do.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Never!

    Enter Mary Ivánovna.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, Mary! I didn't wake you this morning, did I?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. No, I was not asleep. And have you had a successful day?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes, very.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Why, your coffee is quite cold! Why do you drink it like
that? By the way, we must prepare for our visitors. You know the
Cheremshánovs are coming?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, if you're glad to have them, I shall be very
pleased.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I like her and her children, but they have chosen a
rather inconvenient time for their visit.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA [rising] Well, talk matters over with him, and I'll
go and watch the tennis.

    A pause, then Mary Ivánovna and Nicholas Ivánovich begin both
    talking at once.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. It's inconvenient, because we must have a talk.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I was just saying to Aline ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA. What?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No, you speak first.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Well, I wanted to have a talk with you about Styópa.
After all, something _must_ be decided. He, poor fellow, feels
depressed, and does not know what awaits him. He came to me, but how can
I decide?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Why decide? He can decide for himself.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But, you know, he wants to enter the Horse-Guards as a
volunteer, and in order to do that he must get you to countersign his
papers, and he must also be in a position to keep himself; and you don't
give him anything. [Gets excited].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Mary, for heaven's sake don't get excited, but
listen to me. I don't give or withhold anything. To enter military
service of one's own free will, I consider either a stupid, insensate
action, suitable for a savage if the man does not understand the evil of
his action, or despicable if he does it from an interested motive....

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But nowadays everything seems savage and stupid to you.
After all, he must live; you lived!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [getting irritable] I lived when I did not
understand; and when nobody gave me good advice. However, it does not
depend on me but on him.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. How not on you? It's you who don't give him an allowance.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I can't give what is not mine!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Not yours? What do you mean?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. The labour of others does not belong to me. To give
him money, I must first take it from others. I have no right to do that,
and I cannot do it! As long as I manage the estate I must manage it as
my conscience dictates; and I cannot give the fruits of the toil of the
overworked peasants to be spent on the debaucheries of Life-Guardsmen.
Take over my property, and then I shall not be responsible!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. You know very well that I don't want to take it, and
moreover I can't. I have to bring up the children, besides nursing them
and bearing them. It is cruel!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Mary, dear one! That is not the main thing. When you
began to speak I too began and wanted to talk to you quite frankly. We
must not go on like this. We are living together, but don't understand
one another. Sometimes we even seem to misunderstand one another on
purpose.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I want to understand, but I don't. No, I don't understand
you. I do not know what has come to you.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well then, try and understand! This may not be a
convenient time, but heaven knows when we shall find a convenient time.
Understand not me--but yourself: the meaning of your own life! We can't
go on living like this without knowing what we are living for.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. We have lived so, and lived very happily. [Noticing a
look of vexation on his face] All right, all right, I am listening.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes, I too lived so--that is to say, without
thinking why I lived; but a time came when I was terror-struck. Well,
here we are, living on other people's labour--making others work for
us--bringing children into the world and bringing them up to do the
same. Old age will come, and death, and I shall ask myself: "Why have I
lived?" In order to breed more parasites like myself? And, above all, we
do not even enjoy this life. It is only endurable, you know, while, like
Ványa, you overflow with life's energy.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But everybody lives like that.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. And they are all unhappy.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Not at all.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Anyhow, I saw that I was terribly unhappy, and that
I made you and the children unhappy, and I asked myself: "Is it
possible that God created us for this end?" And as soon as I thought of
it, I felt at once that he had not. I asked myself: "What, then, has God
created us for?"

    Enter Man-servant.

MARY IVÁNOVNA [Not listening to her husband, turns to Servant] Bring
some boiled cream.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. And in the Gospels I found the answer, that we
certainly should not live for our own sake. That revealed itself to me
very clearly once, when I was pondering over the parable of the
labourers in the vineyard. You know?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, the labourers.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That parable seemed to show me more clearly than
anything else where my mistake had been. Like those labourers I had
thought that the vineyard was my own, and that my life was my own, and
everything seemed dreadful; but as soon as I had understood that my life
is not my own, but that I am sent into the world to do the will of
God ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But what of it? We all know that!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, if we know it we cannot go on living as we are
doing, for our whole life--far from being a fulfilment of His will--is,
on the contrary, a continual transgression of it.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But how is it a transgression--when we live without doing
harm to anyone?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. But are we doing no harm? Such an outlook on life is
just like that of those labourers. Why we ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, I know the parable--and that he paid them all
equally.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [after a pause] No, it's not that. But do, Mary,
consider one thing--that we have only one life, and can live it well, or
can waste it.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I can't think and argue! I don't sleep at night; I am
nursing. I have to manage the whole house, and instead of helping me,
you say things to me that I don't understand.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Mary!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. And now these visitors.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No, let us come to an understanding. [Kisses her]
Shan't we?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, only be like you used to be.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I can't, but now listen.

    The sound of bells and an approaching vehicle are heard.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I can't now--they have arrived! I must go to meet them.
[Exit behind corner of house. Styópa and Lyúba follow her].

VÁNYA. We shan't abandon it; we must finish the game later. Well, Lyúba,
what now?

LYÚBA [seriously] No nonsense, please.

    Alexándra Ivánovna, with her husband and Lisa, come out on to the
    verandah. Nicholas Ivánovich paces up and down wrapt in thought.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Well, have you convinced her?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Alína, what is going on between us is very
important. Jokes are out of place. It is not I who am convincing her,
but life, truth, God: they are convincing her--therefore she cannot help
being convinced, if not to-day then to-morrow, if not to-morrow ... It
is awful that no one ever has time. Who is it that has just come?

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. It's the Cheremshánovs. Catiche Cheremshánov, whom I
have not met for eighteen years. The last time I saw her we sang
together: "La ci darem la mano." [Sings].

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Please don't interrupt us, and don't imagine that I
shall quarrel with Nicholas. I am telling the truth. [To Nicholas
Ivánovich] I am not joking at all, but it seemed to me strange that you
wanted to convince Mary just when she had made up her mind to have it
out with you!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Very well, very well. They are coming. Please tell
Mary I shall be in my room. [Exit].


                                Curtain.




ACT II


SCENE 1

    In the same country-house, a week later. The scene represents a
    large dining-hall. The table is laid for tea and coffee, with a
    samovár. A grand piano and a music-stand are by the wall. Mary
    Ivánovna, the Princess and Peter Semyónovich are seated at the
    table.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Ah, Princess, it does not seem so long ago since you
were singing Rosina's part, and I ... though nowadays I am not fit even
for a Don Basilio.

PRINCESS. Our children might do the singing now, but times have changed.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. Yes, these are matter-of-fact times ... But your
daughter plays really seriously and well. Where are the young folk? Not
asleep still, surely?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, they went out riding by moonlight last night, and
returned very late. I was nursing baby and heard them.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. And when will my better-half be back? Have you sent
the coachman for her?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, they went for her quite early; I expect she will be
here soon.

PRINCESS. Did Alexándra Ivánovna really go on purpose to fetch Father
Gerásim?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, the idea occurred to her yesterday, and she was off
at once.

PRINCESS. _Quelle énergie! Je l'admire._[26]

  [26] What energy, I do admire her.

PETER SEMYÓNOVICH. _Oh, pour ceci, ce n'est pas ça qui nous manque._[27]
[Takes out a cigar] But I will go and have a smoke and take a stroll
through the park with the dogs till the young people are up. [Exit].

  [27] Oh, as far as that goes, we are not lacking.

PRINCESS. I don't know, dear Mary Ivánovna, whether I am right, but it
seems to me that you take it all too much to heart. I understand him. He
is in a very exalted state of mind. Well, even supposing he does give to
the poor? Don't we anyway think too much about ourselves?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, if that were all, but you don't know him; nor all he
is after. It is not simply helping the poor, but a complete revolution,
the destruction of everything.

PRINCESS. I do not wish to intrude into your family life, but if you
will allow me ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Not at all--I look upon you as one of the
family--especially now.

PRINCESS. I should advise you to put your demands to him openly and
frankly, and to come to an agreement as to the limits ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA [excitedly] There are no limits! He wants to give away
everything. He wishes me now, at my age, to become a cook and a
washerwoman.

PRINCESS. No, is it possible! That is extraordinary.

MARY IVÁNOVNA [takes a letter out of her pocket] We are by ourselves and
I am glad to tell you all about it. He wrote me this letter yesterday. I
will read it to you.

PRINCESS. What? He lives in the same house with you, and writes you
letters? How strange!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. No, I understand him there. He gets so excited when he
speaks. I have for some time past felt anxious about his health.

PRINCESS. What did he write?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. This [reading] "You reproach me for upsetting our former
way of life, and for not giving you anything new in exchange, and not
saying how I should like to arrange our family affairs. When we begin to
discuss it we both get excited, and that's why I am writing to you. I
have often told you already why I cannot continue to live as we have
been doing; and I cannot, in a letter, show you why that is so, nor why
we must live in accord to Christ's teaching. You can do one of two
things: either believe in the truth and voluntarily go with me, or
believe in me and trusting yourself entirely to me--follow me." [Stops
reading] I can do neither the one nor the other. I do not consider it
necessary to live as he wishes us to. I have to consider the children,
and I cannot rely on him. [Reads] "My plan is this: We shall give our
land to the peasants, retaining only 135 acres besides the orchards and
kitchen-garden and the meadow by the river. We will try to work
ourselves, but will not force one another, nor the children. What we
keep should still bring us in about £50 a year."

PRINCESS. Live on £50 a year--with seven children! Is it possible!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Well, here follows his whole plan: to give up the house
and have it turned into a school, and ourselves to live in the
gardener's two-roomed cottage.

PRINCESS. Yes, now I begin to see that there is something abnormal about
it. What did you answer?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I told him I couldn't; that were I alone I would follow
him anywhere, but I have the children.... Only think! I am still nursing
little Nicholas. I tell him we can't break up everything like that.
After all, was that what I agreed to when I married? And now I am no
longer young or strong. Think what it has meant to bear and nurse nine
children.

PRINCESS. I never dreamed that things had gone so far.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. That is how things are and I don't know what will
happen. Yesterday he excused the Dmítrovka peasants their rent; and he
wants to give the land to them altogether.

PRINCESS. I do not think you should allow it. It is your duty to protect
your children. If he cannot deal with the estate, let him hand it over
to you.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But I don't want that.

PRINCESS. You ought to take it for the children's sake. Let him transfer
the property to you.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. My sister Alexándra told him so; but he says he has no
right to do it; and that the land belongs to those who work it, and that
it is his duty to give it to the peasants.

PRINCESS. Yes, now I see that the matter is far more serious than I
thought.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. And the Priest! The Priest takes his side, too.

PRINCESS. Yes, I noticed that yesterday.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. That's why my sister has gone to Moscow. She wanted to
talk things over with a lawyer, but chiefly she went to fetch Father
Gerásim that he may bring his influence to bear.

PRINCESS. Yes, I do not think that Christianity calls upon us to ruin
our families.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But he will not believe even Father Gerásim. He is so
firm; and when he talks, you know, I can't answer him. That's what is so
terrible, that it seems to me he is right.

PRINCESS. That is because you love him.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I don't know, but it's terrible, and everything remains
unsettled--and that is Christianity!

    Enter Nurse.

NURSE. Will you please come. Little Nicholas has woke up and is crying
for you.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Directly! When I am excited he gets stomach ache. Coming,
coming!

    Nicholas Ivánovich enters by another door, with a paper in his hand.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No, this is impossible!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. What has happened?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Why, Peter is to be imprisoned on account of some
wretched pine-trees of ours.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. How's that?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Quite simply! He cut it down, and they informed the
Justice of Peace, and he has sentenced him to three months'
imprisonment. His wife has come about it.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Well, and can't anything be done?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Not now. The only way is not to possess any forest.
And I will not possess any. What is one to do? I shall, however, go and
see whether what we have done can be remedied. [Goes out on to the
verandah and meets Borís and Lyúba].

LYÚBA. Good morning, papa [kisses him], where are you going?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I have just returned from the village and am going
back again. They are just dragging a hungry man to prison because he ...

LYÚBA. I suppose it's Peter?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes, Peter. [Exit, followed by Mary Ivánovna].

LYÚBA [sits down in front of samovár] Will you have tea or coffee?

BORÍS. I don't mind.

LYÚBA. It's always the same, and I see no end to it!

BORÍS. I don't understand him. I know the people are poor and ignorant
and must be helped, but not by encouraging thieves.

LYÚBA. But how?

BORÍS. By our whole activity. By using all our knowledge in their
service, but not by sacrificing one's own life.

LYÚBA. And papa says, that that is just what is wanted.

BORÍS. I don't understand. One can serve the people without ruining
one's own life. That is the way I want to arrange my life. If only
you ...

LYÚBA. I want what you want, and am not afraid of anything.

BORÍS. How about those earrings--that dress ...

LYÚBA. The earrings can be sold and the dresses must be different, but
one need not make oneself quite a guy.

BORÍS. I should like to have another talk with him. Do you think I
should disturb him if I followed him to the village?

LYÚBA. Not at all. I see he has grown fond of you, and he addressed
himself chiefly to you last night.

BORÍS [finishes his coffee] Well, I'll go then.

LYÚBA. Yes, do, and I'll go and wake Lisa and Tónya.


                                Curtain.


SCENE 2

    Village street. Iván Zyábrev, covered with a sheepskin coat, is
    lying near a hut.

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. Maláshka!

    A tiny girl comes out of the hut with a baby in her arms. The baby
    is crying.

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. Get me a drink of water.

    Maláshka goes back into the hut, from where the baby can be heard
    screaming. She brings a bowl of water.

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. Why do you always beat the youngster and make him howl?
I'll tell mother.

MALÁSHKA. Tell her then. It's hunger makes him howl!

IVÁN ZYÁBREV [drinks] You should go and ask the Démkins for some milk.

MALÁSHKA. I went, but there wasn't any. And there was no one at home.

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. Oh! if only I could die! Have they rung for dinner?

MALÁSHKA. They have. Here's the master coming.

    Enter Nicholas Ivánovich.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Why have you come out here?

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. Too many flies in there, and it's too hot.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Then you're warm now?

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. Yes, now I'm burning all over.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. And where is Peter? Is he at home?

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. At home, at this time? Why, he's gone to the field to cart
the corn.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. And I hear that they want to put him in prison.

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. That's so, the Policeman has gone to the field for him.

    Enter a pregnant Woman, carrying a sheaf of oats and a rake. She
    immediately hits Maláshka on the back of the head.

WOMAN. What d'you mean by leaving the baby? Don't you hear him howling!
Running about the streets is all _you_ know.

MALÁSHKA [howling] I've only just come out. Daddy wanted a drink.

WOMAN. I'll give it you. [She sees the land-owner, N. I. Sarýntsov]
Good-day, sir. Children are a trouble! I'm quite done up, everything on
my shoulders, and now they're taking our only worker to prison, and this
lout is sprawling about here.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. What are you saying? He's quite ill!

WOMAN. He's ill, and what about me? Am I not ill? When it's work, he's
ill; but to merry-make or pull my hair out, he's not too ill. Let him
die like a hound! What do I care?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. How can you say such wicked things?

WOMAN. I know it's a sin; but I can't subdue my heart. I'm expecting
another child, and I have to work for two. Other people have their
harvest in already, and we have not mowed a quarter of our oats yet. I
ought to finish binding the sheaves, but can't. I had to come and see
what the children were about.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. The oats shall be cut--I'll hire someone, and to
bind the sheaves too.

WOMAN. Oh, binding's nothing. I can do that myself, if it's only mown
down quick. What d'you think, Nicholas Ivánovich, will he die? He is
very ill!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I don't know. But he really is very ill. I think we
must send him to the hospital.

WOMAN. Oh God! [Begins to cry] Don't take him away, let him die
here.[28] [To her husband, who utters something] What's the matter?

  [28] The woman, for all her roughness, is sorry to part from her
  husband.

IVÁN ZYÁBREV. I want to go to the hospital. Here I'm treated worse than
a dog.

WOMAN. Well, I don't know. I've lost my head. Maláshka, get dinner
ready.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. What have you for dinner?

WOMAN. What? Why, potatoes and bread, and not enough of that. [Enters
hut. A pig squeals, and children are crying inside].

IVÁN ZYÁBREV [groans] Oh Lord, if I could but die!

    Enter Borís.

BORÍS. Can I be of any use?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Here no one can be of use to another. The evil is
too deeply rooted. Here we can only be of use to ourselves, by seeing on
what we build our happiness. Here is a family: five children, the wife
pregnant, the husband ill, nothing but potatoes to eat, and at this
moment the question is being decided whether they are to have enough to
eat next year or not. Help is not possible. How can one help? Suppose I
hire a labourer; who will he be? Just such another man: one who has
given up his farming, from drink or from want.

BORÍS. Excuse me, but if so, what are you doing here?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I am learning my own position. Finding out who weeds
our gardens, builds our houses, makes our garments, and feeds and
clothes us. [Peasants with scythes and women with rakes pass by and bow.
Nicholas Ivánovich, stopping one of the Peasants] Ermíl, won't you take
on the job of carting for these people?

ERMÍL [shakes his head] I would with all my heart, but I can't possibly
do it. I haven't carted my own yet. We are off now to do some carting.
But is Iván dying?

ANOTHER PEASANT. Here's Sebastian, he may take on the job. I say, Daddy
Sebastian! They want a man to get the oats in.

SEBASTIAN. Take the job on yourself. At this time of year one day's work
brings a year's food. [The Peasants pass on].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. They are all half-starved; they have only bread and
water, they are ill, and many of them are old. That old man, for
instance, is ruptured and is suffering, and yet he works from four in
the morning to ten at night, though he is only half alive. And we? Is it
possible, realising all this, to live quietly and consider oneself a
Christian? Or let alone a Christian--simply not a beast?

BORÍS. But what can one do?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Not take part in this evil. Not own the land, nor
devour the fruits of their labour. How this can be arranged, I don't yet
know. The fact of the matter is--at any rate it was so with me--I lived
and did not realise how I was living. I did not realise that I am a son
of God and that we are all sons of God--and all brothers. But as soon as
I realised it--realised that we have all an equal right to live--my
whole life was turned upside down. But I cannot explain it to you now. I
will only tell you this: I was blind, just as my people at home are, but
now my eyes are opened and I cannot help seeing; and seeing it all, I
can't continue to live in such a way. However, that will keep till
later. Now we must see what can be done.

    Enter Policeman, Peter, his wife, and boy.

PETER [falls at Nicholas Ivánovich's feet] Forgive me, for the Lord's
sake, or I'm ruined. How can the woman get in the harvest? If at least I
might be bailed out.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I will go and write a petition for you. [To
Policeman] Can't you let him remain here for the present?

POLICEMAN. Our orders are to take him to the police-station now.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [to Peter] Well then go, and I'll do what I can. This
is evidently my doing. How can one go on living like this? [Exit].


                                Curtain.


SCENE 3

    In the same country-house. It is raining outside. A drawing-room
    with a grand piano. Tónya has just finished playing a sonata of
    Schumann's and is sitting at the piano. Styópa is standing by the
    piano. Borís is sitting. Lyúba, Lisa, Mitrofán Ermílych and the
    young Priest are all stirred by the music.

LYÚBA. That andante! Isn't it lovely!

STYÓPA. No, the scherzo. Though really the whole of it is beautiful.

LISA. Very fine.

STYÓPA. But I had no idea you were such an artist. It is real masterly
play. Evidently the difficulties no longer exist for you, and you think
only of the feeling, and express it with wonderful delicacy.

LYÚBA. Yes, and with dignity.

TÓNYA. While _I_ felt that it was not at all what I meant it to be. A
great deal remained unexpressed.

LISA. What could be better? It was wonderful.

LYÚBA. Schumann is good, but all the same Chopin takes a stronger hold
of one's heart.

STYÓPA. He is more lyrical.

TÓNYA. There is no comparison.

LYÚBA. Do you remember his prelude?

TÓNYA. Oh, the one called the George Sand prelude? [Plays the
commencement].

LYÚBA. No, not that one. That is very fine, but so hackneyed. Do play
this one. [Tónya plays what she can of it, and then breaks off].

TÓNYA. Oh, that is a lovely thing. There is something elemental about
it--older than creation.

STYÓPA [laughs] Yes, yes. Do play it. But no, you are too tired. As it
is, we have had a delightful morning, thanks to you.

TÓNYA [rises and looks out of window] There are some more peasants
waiting outside.

LYÚBA. That is why music is so precious. I understand Saul. Though I'm
not tormented by devils, I still understand him. No other art can make
one so forget everything else as music does. [Approaches the window. To
Peasants] Whom do you want?

PEASANTS. We have been sent to speak to Nicholas Ivánovich.

LYÚBA. He is not in. You must wait.

TÓNYA. And yet you are marrying Borís who understands nothing about
music.

LYÚBA. Oh, surely not.

BORÍS [absently] Music? Oh no. I like music, or rather I don't dislike
it. Only I prefer something simpler--I like songs.

TÓNYA. But is not this sonata lovely?

BORÍS. The chief thing is, that it is not important; and it rather hurts
me, when I think of the lives men live, that so much importance is
attached to music.

    They all eat sweetmeats, which are standing on the table.

LISA. How nice it is to have a fiancé here and sweetmeats provided!

BORÍS. Oh that is not my doing. It's mamma's.

TÓNYA. And quite right too.

LYÚBA. Music is precious because it seizes us, takes possession of us,
and carries us away from reality. Everything seemed gloomy till you
suddenly began to play, and really it has made everything brighter.

LISA. And Chopin's valses. They are hackneyed, but all the same ...

TÓNYA. This ... [plays].

    Enter Nicholas Ivánovich. He greets Borís, Tónya, Styópa, Lisa,
    Mitrofán Ermílych and the Priest.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Where's mamma?

LYÚBA. I think she's in the nursery.

    Styópa calls the Man-servant.

LYÚBA. Papa, how wonderfully Tónya plays! And where have you been?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. In the village.

    Enter servant, Afanásy.

STYÓPA. Bring another samovár.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [greets the Man-servant, and shakes hands with
him[29]] Good-day. [Servant becomes confused. Exit Servant. Nicholas
Ivánovich also goes off].

  [29] People shake hands much more often in Russia than in England, but
  it is quite unusual to shake hands with a servant, and Nicholas
  Ivánovich does it in consequence of his belief that all men are
  brothers.

STYÓPA. Poor Afanásy! He was terribly confused. I can't understand papa.
It is as if we were guilty of something.

    Enter Nicholas Ivánovich.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I was going back to my room without having told you
what I feel. [To Tónya] If what I say should offend you--who are our
guest--forgive me, but I cannot help saying it. You, Lisa, say that
Tónya plays well. All you here, seven or eight healthy young men and
women, have slept till ten o'clock, have eaten and drunk and are still
eating; and you play and discuss music: while there, where I have just
been, they were all up at three in the morning, and those who pastured
the horses at night have not slept at all; and old and young, the sick
and the weak, children and nursing-mothers and pregnant women are
working to the utmost limits of their strength, so that we here may
consume the fruits of their labour. Nor is that all. At this very
moment, one of them, the only breadwinner of a family, is being dragged
to prison because he has cut down one of a hundred thousand pine-trees
that grow in the forest that is called _mine_. And we here, washed and
clothed, having left the slops in our bedrooms to be cleaned up by
slaves, eat and drink and discuss Schumann and Chopin and which of them
moves us most or best cures our ennui? That is what I was thinking when
I passed you, so I have spoken. Consider, is it possible to go on living
in this way? [Stands greatly agitated].

LISA. True, quite true!

LYÚBA. If one lets oneself think about it, one can't live.

STYÓPA. Why? I don't see why the fact that people are poor should
prevent one talking about Schumann. The one does not exclude the other.
If one ...

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [angrily] If one has no heart, if one is made of
wood ...

STYÓPA. Well, I'll hold my tongue.

TÓNYA. It is a terrible problem; it is the problem of our day; and we
should not be afraid of it, but look it straight in the face, in order
to solve it.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. We cannot wait for the problem to be solved by
public measures. Every one of us must die--if not to-day, then
to-morrow. How can I live without suffering from this internal discord?

BORÍS. Of course there is only one way; that is, not to take part in it
at all.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, forgive me if I have hurt you. I could not
help saying what I felt. [Exit].

STYÓPA. Not take part in it? But our whole life is bound up with it.

BORÍS. That is why he says that the first step is to possess no
property; to change our whole way of life and live so as not to be
served by others but to serve others.

TÓNYA. Well, I see _you_ have quite gone over to Nicholas Ivánovich's
side.

BORÍS. Yes, I now understand it for the first time--after what I saw in
the village.... You need only take off the spectacles through which we
are accustomed to look at the life of the people, to realise at once the
connection between their sufferings and our pleasures--that is enough!

MITROFÁN ERMÍLYCH. Yes, but the remedy does not consist in ruining one's
own life.

STYÓPA. It is surprising how Mitrofán Ermílych and I, though we usually
stand poles asunder, come to the same conclusion: those are my very
words, "not ruin one's own life."

BORÍS. Naturally! You both of you wish to lead a pleasant life, and
therefore want life arranged so as to ensure that pleasant life for you.
[To Styópa] You wish to maintain the present system, while Mitrofán
Ermílych wants to establish a new one.

    Lyúba and Tónya whisper together. Tónya goes to the piano and plays
    a nocturne by Chopin. General silence.

STYÓPA. That's splendid; that solves everything.

BORÍS. It obscures and postpones everything!

    While Tónya is playing, Mary Ivánovna and the Princess enter quietly
    and sit down to listen.

    Before the end of the nocturne carriage bells are heard outside.

LYÚBA. It is Aunt. [Goes to meet her].

    The music continues. Enter Alexándra Ivánovna, Father Gerásim (a
    priest with a cross round his neck) and a Notary. All rise.

FATHER GERÁSIM. Please go on, it is very pleasant.

    The Princess approaches to receive his blessing, and the young
    Priest does the same.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I have done exactly what I said I would do. I found
Father Gerásim, and you see I have persuaded him to come--he was on his
way to Koursk--so I have done my part; and here is the Notary. He has
got the deed ready; it only needs signing.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Won't you have some lunch?

    Notary puts down his papers on the table, and exit.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I am very grateful to Father Gerásim.

FATHER GERÁSIM. What else could I do--though it was out of my way--yet
as a Christian I considered it my duty to visit him.

    Alexándra Ivánovna whispers to the young people. They consult
    together and go out on to the verandah, all except Borís. The young
    Priest also wants to go.

FATHER GERÁSIM.[30] No. You as a pastor and spiritual father must remain
here! You may benefit by it yourself, and may be of use to others. Stay
here, if Mary Ivánovna has no objection.

  [30] Father Gerásim is modelled on the lines of the celebrated Father
  John of Cronstadt.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. No, I am as fond of Father Vasíly as if he were one of
the family. I have even consulted him; but being so young he has not
much authority.

FATHER GERÁSIM. Naturally, naturally.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA [approaching] Well, you see now, Father Gerásim, that
you are the only person who can help and can bring him to reason. He is
a clever, well-read man, but learning, you know, can only do harm. He is
suffering from some sort of delusion. He maintains that the Christian
law forbids a man to own any property; but how is that possible?

FATHER GERÁSIM. Temptation, spiritual pride, self-will! The Fathers of
the Church have answered the question satisfactorily. But how did this
befall him?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Well, to tell you everything ... when we married he was
quite indifferent to religion, and we lived so, and lived happily,
during our best years--the first twenty years. Then he began to reflect.
Perhaps he was influenced by his sister, or by what he read. Anyhow, he
began thinking and reading the Gospels, and then suddenly he grew
extremely religious, began going to church and visiting the monks. Then
all at once he gave all this up and changed his way of life completely.
He began doing manual labour, would not let the servants wait on him,
and above all he is now giving away his property. He yesterday gave away
a forest--both the trees and land. It frightens me, for I have seven
children. Do talk to him. I'll go and ask him whether he will see you.
[Exit].

FATHER GERÁSIM. Nowadays many are falling away. And is the estate his or
his wife's?

PRINCESS. His! That's what is so unfortunate.

FATHER GERÁSIM. And what is his official rank?

PRINCESS. His rank is not high. Only that of a cavalry captain, I
believe. He was once in the army.

FATHER GERÁSIM. There are many who turn aside in that way. In Odessa
there was a lady who was carried away by Spiritualism and began to do
much harm. But all the same, God enabled us to lead her back to the
Church.

PRINCESS. The chief thing, please understand, is that my son is about to
marry his daughter. I have given my consent, but the girl is used to
luxury and should therefore be provided for, and not have to depend
entirely on my son. Though I admit he is a hard-working and an
exceptional young man.

    Enter Mary Ivánovna and Nicholas Ivánovich.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. How d'you do, Princess? How d'you do? [To Father
Gerásim] I beg your pardon. I don't know your name.[31]

  [31] He knows that the priest is Father Gerásim, but wishes to address
  him not as a priest, but by his Christian name and patronymic, as one
  gentleman would usually address another.

FATHER GERÁSIM. Do you not wish to receive my blessing?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No, I don't.

FATHER GERÁSIM. My name is Gerásim Sédorovitch. Very pleased to meet
you.

    Men-servants bring lunch and wine.

FATHER GERÁSIM. Pleasant weather, and good for the harvest.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I suppose you came, at Alexándra Ivánovna's
invitation, to divert me from my errors and direct me in the path of
truth. If that is so, don't let us beat about the bush, but let us get
to business at once. I do not deny that I disagree with the teaching of
the Church. I used to agree with it, and then left off doing so. But
with my whole heart I wish to be in the truth and will at once accept it
if you show it to me.

FATHER GERÁSIM. How is it you say you don't believe the teaching of the
Church? What is there to believe in, if not the Church?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. God and His law, given to us in the Gospels.

FATHER GERÁSIM. The Church teaches that very law.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. If it did so, I should believe in the Church, but
unfortunately it teaches the contrary.

FATHER GERÁSIM. The Church cannot teach the contrary, because it was
established by the Lord himself. It is written, "I give you power," and,
"Upon this rock I will build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it."

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That was not said in this connection at all, and
proves nothing. But even if we were to admit that Christ established the
Church, how do I know that it was _your_ Church?

FATHER GERÁSIM. Because it is said, "Where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them."

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That, too, was not said in this connection, and
proves nothing.

FATHER GERÁSIM. How _can_ one deny the Church? It alone provides
salvation.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I did not deny the Church until I found it supported
everything that is contrary to Christianity.

FATHER GERÁSIM. It can make no mistakes, for it alone has the truth.
Those who leave it go astray, but the Church is sacred.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I have already told you that I do not accept that. I
do not accept it because, as is said in the Gospels, "By their deeds
shall ye know them, by their fruit shall ye know them." I have found out
that the Church blesses oaths, murders and executions.

FATHER GERÁSIM. The Church acknowledges and sanctifies the Powers
ordained by God.

    During the conversation, Styópa, Lyúba, Lisa and Tónya at different
    times enter the room and sit or stand listening.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I know that the Gospels say, not only "Do not kill,"
but "Do not be angry," yet the Church blesses the army. The Gospel
says, "Swear not at all," yet the Church administers oaths. The Gospel
says ...

FATHER GERÁSIM. Excuse me. When Pilate[32] said, "I adjure thee by the
living God," Christ accepted his oath by replying "I am."

  [32] Father Gerásim attributes to Pilate what was said by Caiaphas the
  high priest.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Dear me! What are you saying? That is really absurd.

FATHER GERÁSIM. That is why the Church does not permit everyone to
interpret the Gospel, lest he should go astray, but like a mother caring
for her child gives him an interpretation suitable to his strength. No,
let me finish! The Church does not lay on its children burdens too heavy
for them to bear, but demands that they should keep the Commandments:
love, do no murder, do not steal, do not commit adultery.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes! Do not kill me, do not steal from me my stolen
goods. We have all robbed the people, we have stolen their land and have
then made a law forbidding them to steal it back; and the Church
sanctions all these things.

FATHER GERÁSIM. Heresy and spiritual pride are speaking through you. You
ought to conquer your intellectual pride.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. It is not pride. I am only asking you what should I
do according to Christ's law, when I have become conscious of the sin of
robbing the people and enslaving them by means of the land. How am I to
act? Continue to own land and to profit by the labour of starving men:
putting them to this kind of work [points to Servant who is bringing in
the lunch and some wine], or am I to return the land to those from whom
my ancestors stole it?

FATHER GERÁSIM. You must act as behoves a son of the Church. You have a
family and children, and you must keep and educate them in a way
suitable to their position.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Why?

FATHER GERÁSIM. Because God has placed you in that position. If you wish
to be charitable, be charitable by giving away part of your property and
by visiting the poor.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. But how is it that the rich young man was told that
the rich cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven?

FATHER GERÁSIM. It is said, "If thou wouldest be perfect."

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. But I _do_ wish to be perfect. The Gospels say, "Be
ye perfect as your Father in Heaven ..."

FATHER GERÁSIM. But we have to understand in what connection a thing is
said.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I do try to understand, and all that is said in the
Sermon on the Mount is plain and comprehensible.

FATHER GERÁSIM. Spiritual pride.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Where is the pride, since it is said that what is
hidden from the wise is revealed to babes?

FATHER GERÁSIM. Revealed to the meek, but not to the proud.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. But who is proud? I, who consider myself a man like
the rest of mankind, and one who therefore must live like the rest by
his own labour and as poorly as his brother men, or those who consider
themselves to be specially selected sacred people, knowing the whole
truth and incapable of error; and who interpret Christ's words their own
way?

FATHER GERÁSIM [offended] Pardon me, Nicholas Ivánovich, I did not come
here to argue which of us is right, nor to receive an admonition, but I
called, at Alexándra Ivánovna's request, to talk things over with you.
But since you know everything better than I do, we had better end our
conversation. Only, once again, I must entreat you in God's name to come
to your senses. You have gone cruelly astray and are ruining yourself.
[Rises].

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Won't you have something to eat?

FATHER GERÁSIM. No, I thank you. [Exit with Alexándra Ivánovna].

MARY IVÁNOVNA [to young Priest] And what now?

PRIEST. Well, in my opinion, Nicholas Ivánovich spoke the truth, and
Father Gerásim produced no argument on his side.

PRINCESS. He was not allowed to speak, and he did not like having a kind
of debate with everybody listening. It was his modesty that made him
withdraw.

BORÍS. It wasn't modesty at all. All he said was so false. It was
evident that he had nothing to say.

PRINCESS. Yes, with your usual instability I see that you are beginning
to agree with Nicholas Ivánovich about everything. If you believe such
things you ought not to marry.

BORÍS. I only say that truth is truth, and I can't help saying it.

PRINCESS. You of all people should not talk like that.

BORÍS. Why not?

PRINCESS. Because you are poor, and have nothing to give away. However,
all this is not our business. [Exit, followed by all except Nicholas
Ivánovich and Mary Ivánovna].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [sits pondering, then smiles at his own thoughts]
Mary! What is all this for? Why did you invite that wretched, erring
man? Why do those noisy women and that priest come into our most
intimate life? Can we not settle our own affairs?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. What am I to do, if you want to leave the children
penniless? That is what I cannot quietly submit to. You know that I am
not grasping, and that I want nothing for myself.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I know, I know and believe it. But the misfortune is
that you do not trust the truth. I know you see it, but you can't make
up your mind to rely on it. You rely neither on the truth nor on me. Yet
you trust the crowd--the Princess and the rest of them.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I believe in you, I always did; but when you want to let
the children go begging ...

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That means that you do not rely on me. Do you think
I have not struggled and have not feared! But afterwards I became
convinced that this course is not only possible but obligatory, and that
it is the one thing necessary and good for the children themselves. You
always say that were it not for the children you would follow me, but I
say that if we had no children we might live as we are doing; we should
then only be injuring ourselves, but now we are injuring them too.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But what am I to do, if I don't understand?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. And what am I to do? Don't I know why that wretched
man--dressed up in his cassock and wearing that cross--was sent for, and
why Alexándra Ivánovna brought the Notary? You want me to hand the
estate over to you, but I can't. You know that I have loved you all the
twenty years we have lived together. I love you and wish you well, and
therefore cannot sign away the estate to you. If I sign it away at all,
it can only be to give it back to those from whom it has been taken--the
peasants. And I can't let things remain as they are, but must give it to
them. I'm glad the Notary has come; and I will do it.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. No, that is dreadful! Why this cruelty? Though you think
it a sin, still give it to me. [Weeps].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. You don't know what you are saying. If I give it to
you, I cannot go on living with you; I shall have to go away. I cannot
continue to live under these conditions. I shall not be able to look on
while the life-blood is squeezed out of the peasants and they are
imprisoned, in your name if not in mine. So choose!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. How cruel you are! Is this Christianity? It is harshness!
I cannot, after all, live as you want me to. I cannot rob my own
children and give everything away to other people; and that is why you
want to desert me. Well--do so! I see you have ceased loving me, and I
even know why.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Very well then--I will sign; but, Mary, you demand
the impossible of me. [Goes to writing-table and signs] You wished it,
but I shall not be able to go on living like this.


                                Curtain.




ACT III


SCENE 1

    The scene is laid in Moscow. A large room. In it a carpenter's
    bench; a table with papers on it; a book-cupboard; a looking-glass
    and pictures on the wall behind, with some planks leaning in front
    of them. A Carpenter and Nicholas Ivánovich wearing a carpenter's
    apron are working at the bench, planing.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [takes a board from the vice] Is that all right?

CARPENTER [setting a plane] Not quite, you must do it more boldly--like
this.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. It is easy to say boldly, but I can't manage it.

CARPENTER. But why should your honour trouble to learn to be a
carpenter? There are such a lot of us nowadays that we can hardly get a
living as it is.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [at work again] I'm ashamed to lead an idle life.

CARPENTER. Yours is that kind of position. God has given you property.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That's just where it is. I don't believe that God
gave it, but that some of us have taken it, and taken it from our
brother men.

CARPENTER [taken aback] That's so! But still you've no need to do this.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I understand that it must seem strange to you that
while living in this house where there is such superfluity, I should
wish to earn something.

CARPENTER [laughs] No. Everybody knows that gentlefolk want to master
everything. Well, now go over it again with the smoothing plane.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. You won't believe me and will laugh, but still I
must tell you that formerly I was not ashamed to live in this way, but
now that I believe in Christ's law, which tells us we are all
brothers--I am ashamed to live so.

CARPENTER. If you are ashamed of it, give away your property.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I wanted to, but failed, and gave it to my wife.

CARPENTER. But after all it would not be possible for you to do it--you
are too used to comforts.

[Voice outside the door] Papa, may I come in?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. You may, you always may.

    Enter Lyúba.

LYÚBA. Good-day, Jacob!

CARPENTER. Good-day, Miss!

LYÚBA. Borís has gone to his regiment. I am afraid of what he may do or
say there. What do you think?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. What can I think? He will do what is natural to him.

LYÚBA. It is awful. He has such a short time to serve[33] and may go and
ruin his whole life.

  [33] The period of compulsory service for a University graduate would
  be short in any case.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. He did well not to come to see me. He understands
that I can't say anything to him but what he knows himself. He told me
that he handed in his resignation because he sees that not only is there
no more immoral, lawless, cruel and brutal occupation than this one, the
object of which is to kill, but also that there is nothing more
degrading and mean than to have to submit implicitly to any man of
higher rank who happens to come along. He knows all that.

LYÚBA. That's just why I am afraid. He knows that, and may want to take
some action.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. His conscience--the God that dwells within him--will
decide that. Had he come to me I should have given him only one piece of
advice: not to do anything in which he is guided by his reason
alone--nothing is worse than that--but only to act when his whole being
demands it. Now I, for instance, wished to act according to Christ's
injunction: to leave father, wife and children and to follow Him, and I
left home, but how did it end? It ended by my coming back and living
with you in luxury in town. Because I was trying to do more than I had
strength for, I have landed myself in this degrading and senseless
position: I wish to live simply and to work with my hands, but in these
surroundings, with lackeys and porters, it seems a kind of affectation.
I see that, even now, Jacob Nikonórych is laughing at me.

CARPENTER. Why should I laugh? You pay me, and give me my tea. I am
grateful to you.

LYÚBA. I wonder if I had not better go to him.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. My dear, my darling, I know you find it hard and are
frightened, though you should not be so. After all, I am a man who
understands life. Nothing evil can happen. All that appears evil really
makes one's heart more joyful; only understand that a man who has
started on that path will have to choose, and it sometimes happens that
God's side and the Devil's weigh so equally that the scales oscillate,
and it is then that the great choice has to be made. At that point any
interference from outside is terribly dangerous and tormenting. It is as
though a man were making such terrible efforts to draw a weight over a
ridge that the slightest touch would cause him to break his back.

LYÚBA. Why should he suffer so?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That is as though a mother were to ask why she
should suffer. There can be no childbirth without suffering, and it is
the same in spiritual life. One thing I can tell you. Borís is a true
Christian, and consequently is free, and if you cannot as yet be like
him, or believe in God as he does, then believe in God through him.

MARY IVÁNOVNA [behind door] May I come in?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. You may always come in. What a reception I'm having
here to-day.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Our priest, Vasíly Nikonórovich, has come. He is going to
the Bishop, and has resigned his living!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Impossible!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. He is here! Lyúba, go and call him! He wants to see you.
[Exit Lyúba]. I had another reason for coming. I want to speak to you
about Ványa. He behaves abominably, and does his lesson so badly that he
can't possibly pass; and when I speak to him he is rude.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Mary, you know I am out of sympathy with the whole
manner of life you are all leading, and with the education you are
giving to the children. It is a terrible question for me, whether I have
a right to see them perishing before my very eyes ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Then you should suggest something else, something
definite. But what do you offer?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I cannot say what. But can only say that first we
should get rid of all this depraving luxury.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. So that they should become peasants! I cannot agree to
that.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Then don't consult me. The things that grieve you
are natural and inevitable.

    Enter Priest and Lyúba. The Priest and Nicholas Ivánovich kiss[34]
    one another.

  [34] It is not unusual among Russians for men-friends to kiss one
  another; but it is quite unusual for a man of position to kiss a
  village priest who calls as a visitor--and it indicates great intimacy
  or great emotion.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Is it possible that you have thrown it all up?

PRIEST. I could stand it no longer.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I did not expect it so soon.

PRIEST. But it was really impossible. In our calling we cannot be
indifferent. We have to hear confessions, and to administer the
Sacrament, and when once one has become convinced that it is all not
true ...

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, and what now?

PRIEST. Now I am going to the Bishop to be questioned. I am afraid he
will exile me to the Solovétsk Monastery. At one time I thought of
asking you to help me to escape abroad, but then I considered that it
would seem cowardly. Only, there is my wife!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Where is she?

PRIEST. She has gone to her father's. My mother-in-law came and took our
boy away. That hurt me very much. I should much like ... [pauses,
restraining his tears].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, may God help you! Are you staying with us?

PRINCESS [running into the room] There now, it has happened. He has
refused to serve, and has been put under arrest. I have just been there
but was not admitted. Nicholas Ivánovich, you must go.

LYÚBA. Has he refused? How do you know?

PRINCESS. I was there myself! Vasíly Andréevich, who is a Member of the
Council, told me all about it. Borís just walked in and told them he
would serve no longer, would take no oath, and in fact said everything
Nicholas Ivánovich has taught him.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Princess! Can such things be taught?

PRINCESS. I don't know. Only this is not Christianity! What is your
opinion, Father?

PRIEST. I am no longer "Father."

PRINCESS. Well, all the same. However, you are also one of them! No, I
cannot leave things in this state. And what cursed Christianity it is
that makes people suffer and perish. I hate this Christianity of yours.
It's all right for you, who know you won't be touched; but I have only
one son, and you have ruined him!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Do be calm, Princess.

PRINCESS. Yes you, you have ruined him! And having ruined him, you must
save him. Go and persuade him to abandon all this nonsense. It's all
very well for rich people, but not for us.

LYÚBA [crying] Papa, what can be done?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I will go. Perhaps I can be of some use. [Takes off
his apron].

PRINCESS [helping him on with his coat] They would not let me in, but
now we will go together and I shall get my way. [Exeunt].


                                Curtain.


SCENE 2

    A Government office. A Clerk is seated at a table, and a Sentinel is
    pacing up and down. Enter a General with his Adjutant. The Clerk
    jumps up, the Sentinel presents arms.

GENERAL. Where is the Colonel?

CLERK. Gone to see that new conscript, Your Excellency.

GENERAL. Ah, very well. Ask him to come here to me.

CLERK. Yes, Your Excellency.

GENERAL. And what are you copying out? Isn't it the conscript's
evidence?

CLERK. Yes, sir, it is.

GENERAL. Give it here.

    The Clerk hands General the paper and exit. The General hands it to
    his Adjutant.

GENERAL. Please read it.

ADJUTANT [reading] "These are my answers to the questions put to me,
namely: (1) Why I do not take my oath. (2) Why I refuse to fulfil the
demands of the Government. (3) What induced me to use words offensive
not only to the army but also to the Highest Authorities. In reply to
the first question: I cannot take the oath because I accept Christ's
teaching, which directly and clearly forbids taking oaths, as in St.
Matthew's Gospel, ch. 5 vv. 33-37, and in the Epistle of St. James,
ch. 5 v. 12."

GENERAL. Of course he must be arguing! Putting his own interpretations!

ADJUTANT [goes on reading] "The Gospel says: 'Swear not at all, but let
your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; and what is more than these is of
the evil one!' St. James's Epistle says: 'Before all things, brethren,
swear not by the heavens nor by the earth, nor by any other oath; but
let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, that ye fall not into
temptation!' But apart from the fact that the Bible gives us such clear
injunctions not to swear--or even if it contained no such injunctions--I
should still be unable to swear to obey the will of men, because as a
Christian I must always obey the will of God, which does not always
coincide with the will of men."

GENERAL. He must be arguing! If I had my way, there would be none of
this.

ADJUTANT [reading] "I refuse to fulfil the demands of men calling
themselves the Government, because ..."

GENERAL. What insolence!

ADJUTANT. "Because those demands are criminal and wicked. They demand of
me that I should enter the army, and learn and prepare to commit murder,
though this is forbidden both in the Old and the New Testaments, and
above all by my conscience. To the third question ..."

    Enter Colonel followed by Clerk. The General shakes hands with
    Colonel.

COLONEL. You are reading the evidence?

GENERAL. Yes. Unpardonably insolent language. Well, go on.

ADJUTANT. "To the third question: What induced me to use offensive words
before the Court, my answer is: that I was induced to do so by the wish
to serve God, and in order to expose the fraud carried on in His name.
This desire, I hope to retain till I die, and therefore ..."

GENERAL. Come; that's enough; one can't listen to all this balderdash.
The fact is all this sort of thing must be eradicated, and action taken
to prevent the people being perverted. [To Colonel] Have you spoken to
him?

COLONEL. I have been doing so all the time. I tried to shame him, and
also to convince him that it would only be worse for himself, and that
he would gain nothing by it. Besides that, I spoke of his relations. He
was very excited, but holds to his opinions.

GENERAL. A pity you talked to him so much. We are in the army not to
reason, but to act. Call him here!

    Exit Adjutant with Clerk.

GENERAL [sits down] No, Colonel, that's not the way. Fellows of this
kind must be dealt with in a different manner. Decisive measures are
needed to cut off the diseased limb. One maggoty sheep infects the whole
flock. In these cases one must not be too squeamish. His being a Prince,
and having a mother and a fiancée, is none of our business. We have a
soldier before us and we must obey the Tsar's will.

COLONEL. I only thought that we could move him more easily by
persuasion.

GENERAL. Not at all--by firmness; only by firmness! I have dealt with
men of that sort before. He must be made to feel that he is a
nonentity--a grain of dust beneath a chariot wheel, and that he cannot
stop it.

COLONEL. Well, we can try!

GENERAL [getting irritable] No need to try! I don't need to try! I have
served the Tsar for forty-four years, I have given and am giving my life
to the service, and now this fellow wants to teach me and wants to read
me theological lectures! Let him take that to the Priest, but to me--he
is either a soldier or a prisoner. That's all!

    Enter Borís guarded by two Soldiers and followed by Adjutant and
    Clerk.

GENERAL [pointing with a finger] Place him there.

BORÍS. I need no placing. I shall stand or sit where I like, for I do
not recognise your authority.

GENERAL. Silence! You don't recognise authority? I will make you
recognise it.

BORÍS [sits down on a stool] How wrong it is of you to shout so!

GENERAL. Lift him, and make him stand!

    Soldiers raise him.

BORÍS. That you can do, and you can kill me; but you cannot make me
submit ...

GENERAL. Silence, I tell you. Hear what I have to say to you.

BORÍS. I don't in the least want to hear what you have to say.

GENERAL. He is mad! He must be taken to the hospital to be examined.
That is the only thing to do.

COLONEL. The order was to send him to be examined at the Gendarmes'
office.

GENERAL. Well, then, send him there. Only put him into uniform.

COLONEL. He resists.

GENERAL. Bind him. [To Borís] Please hear what I have to say to you. I
don't care what happens to you, but for your own sake I advise you,
bethink yourself. You will rot in a fortress, and not do any good to
anyone. Give it up. Well, you flared up a bit and I flared up. [Slaps
him on the shoulder] Go, take the oath and give up all that nonsense.
[To Adjutant] Is the Priest here? [To Borís] Well? [Borís is silent] Why
don't you answer? Really you had better do as I say. You can't break a
club with a whip. You can keep your opinions, but serve your time! We
will not use force with you. Well?

BORÍS. I have nothing more to say, I have said all I had to.

GENERAL. There, you see, you wrote that there are such and such texts in
the Gospels. Well, the Priest knows all about that. Have a talk with the
Priest, and then think things over. That will be best. Good-bye, and I
hope "au revoir," when I shall be able to congratulate you on having
entered the Tsar's service. Send the Priest here. [Exit, followed by
Colonel and Adjutant].

BORÍS [To Clerk and Convoy Soldiers] There you see how they deceive you.
They know that they are deceiving you. Don't submit to them. Lay down
your rifles and go away. Let them put you into the Disciplinary
Battalions and flog you; it will not be as bad as it is to serve such
impostors.

CLERK. But how could one get on without an army? It's impossible.

BORÍS. That is not for us to consider. We have to consider what God
demands of us; and God wants us.

ONE OF THE SOLDIERS. But how is it that they speak of "the Christian
army"?

BORÍS. That is not said anywhere in the Bible. It's these impostors who
invented it.

    Enter a Gendarme Officer with Clerk.

GENDARME OFFICER. Is it here that the conscript, Prince Cheremshánov, is
being kept?

CLERK. Yes, sir. Here he is.

GENDARME OFFICER. Come here, please. Are you Prince Borís Siménovich
Cheremshánov, who refuses to take the oath?

BORÍS. I am.

GENDARME OFFICER [sits down and points to a seat opposite] Please sit
down.

BORÍS. I think our conversation will be quite useless.

GENDARME OFFICER. I don't think so. At any rate not useless to you. You
see it's like this. I am informed that you refuse military service and
the oath, and are therefore suspected of belonging to the Revolutionary
Party, and that is what I have to investigate. If it is true, we shall
have to withdraw you from the service and imprison you or banish you
according to the share you have taken in the revolution. If it is not
true, we shall leave you to the military authorities. You see I express
myself quite frankly to you, and I hope you will treat us in the same
way.

BORÍS. In the first place I cannot trust men who wear this sort of thing
[pointing to the Gendarme Officer's uniform]. Secondly, your very
occupation is one I cannot respect, and for which I have the greatest
aversion. But I do not refuse to answer your questions. What do you wish
to know?

GENDARME OFFICER. In the first place, tell me your name, your calling,
and your religion?

BORÍS. You know all that and I will not reply. Only one of the questions
is of great importance to me. I am _not_ what is called an Orthodox
Christian.

GENDARME OFFICER. What then is your religion?

BORÍS. I do not label it.

GENDARME OFFICER. But still?...

BORÍS. Well then, the Christian religion, according to the Sermon on the
Mount.

GENDARME OFFICER. Write it down [Clerk writes. To Borís] Still you
recognise yourself as belonging to some nationality or rank.

BORÍS. No, I don't. I recognise myself as a man, and a servant of God.

GENDARME OFFICER. Why don't you consider yourself a member of the
Russian Empire?

BORÍS. Because I do not recognise any empires.

GENDARME OFFICER. What do you mean by not recognising? Do you wish to
overthrow them?

BORÍS. Certainly I wish it, and work for it.

GENDARME OFFICER [To Clerk] Put that down. [To Borís] How do you work
for it?

BORÍS. By exposing fraud and lies, and by spreading the truth. When you
entered I was telling these soldiers not to believe in the fraud into
which they have been drawn.

GENDARME OFFICER. But beside this method of exposing and persuading, do
you approve of any others?

BORÍS. No, I not only disapprove, but I consider all violence to be a
great sin; and not only violence, but all concealment and craftiness ...

GENDARME OFFICER. Write that down. Very well. Now kindly let me know
whom you are acquainted with. Do you know Ivashénko?

BORÍS. No.

GENDARME OFFICER. Klein?

BORÍS. I have heard of him, but never met him.

    Enter Priest (an old man wearing a cross and carrying a Bible). The
    Clerk goes up to him and receives his blessing.

GENDARME OFFICER. Well, I think I may stop. I consider that you are not
dangerous, and not within our jurisdiction. I wish you a speedy release.
Good-day. [Presses Borís's hand].

BORÍS. One thing I should like to say to you. Forgive me, but I can't
help saying it. Why have you chosen this wicked, cruel profession? I
should advise you to give it up.

GENDARME OFFICER [smiles] Thank you for your advice, but I have my
reasons. My respects to you. [To Priest] Father, I relinquish my place
to you [Exit with Clerk].

PRIEST. How can you so grieve the authorities by refusing to fulfil the
duty of a Christian, to serve the Tsar and your Fatherland?

BORÍS [smiling] Just because I want to fulfil my duty as a Christian, I
do not wish to be a soldier.

PRIEST. Why don't you wish it? It is said that, "To lay down one's life
for a friend" is to be a true Christian....

BORÍS. Yes, to "lay down one's life," but not to take another man's.
That is just what I want to do, to "lay down my life."

PRIEST. You do not reason rightly, young man. John the Baptist said to
the soldiers ...

BORÍS [smiling] That only goes to prove that even in those days the
soldiers used to rob, and he told them not to!

PRIEST. Well, but why don't you wish to take your oath?

BORÍS. You know that the Gospels forbid it!

PRIEST. Not at all. You know that when Pilate said: "I adjure thee by
the living God, art thou the Christ?" the Lord Jesus Christ answered "I
am." That proves that oaths are not forbidden.

BORÍS. Are not you ashamed to talk so? You--an old man.

PRIEST. Take my advice and don't be obstinate. You and I cannot change
the world. Just take your oath and you'll be at ease. Leave it to the
Church to know what is a sin and what is not.

BORÍS. Leave it to you? Are you not afraid to take so much sin upon
yourself?

PRIEST. What sin? Having been brought up firmly in the faith, and
having worked as a priest for thirty years, I can have no sins on my
shoulders.

BORÍS. Whose then is the sin, when you deceive such numbers of people?
What have these poor fellows got in their heads? [Points to Sentinel].

PRIEST. You and I, young man, will never settle that. It is for us to
obey those placed above us.

BORÍS. Leave me alone! I am sorry for you and--I confess--it disgusts me
to listen to you. Now if you were like that General--but you come here
with a cross and the Testament to persuade me in the name of Christ, to
deny Christ! Go [excitedly]. Leave me--Go. Let me be taken back to the
cell that I may not see anyone. I am tired, dreadfully tired!

PRIEST. Well, if that is so, good-bye.

    Enter Adjutant.

ADJUTANT. Well?

PRIEST. Great obstinacy, great insubordination.

ADJUTANT. So he has refused to take the oath and to serve?

PRIEST. On no account will he.

ADJUTANT. Then he must be taken to the hospital.

PRIEST. And reported as ill? That no doubt would be better, or his
example may lead others astray.

ADJUTANT. To be put under observation in the ward for the mentally
diseased. Those are my orders.

PRIEST. Certainly. My respects to you. [Exit].

ADJUTANT [approaches Borís] Come, please. My orders are to conduct
you----

BORÍS. Where to?

ADJUTANT. First of all to the hospital, where it will be quieter for
you, and where you will have time to think things over.

BORÍS. I've thought them over long ago. But let us go! [Exeunt].


                                Curtain.


SCENE 3

    Room in Hospital. Head Doctor, Assistant Doctor, an Officer-Patient
    in a dressing-gown, and two Warders wearing blouses.

PATIENT. I tell you that you are only leading me to perdition. I have
already several times felt quite well.

HEAD DOCTOR. You must not get excited. I should be glad to sign an order
for you to leave the hospital, but you know yourself that liberty is
dangerous for you. If I were sure that you would be looked after ...

PATIENT. You think I should take to drink again? No, I have had my
lesson, but every extra day I spend here only does me harm. You are
doing [gets excited] the opposite of what you ought to do. You are
cruel. It's all very well for _you_!

HEAD DOCTOR. Don't get excited. [Makes a sign to Warders; who come up
from behind].

PATIENT. It's easy for you to argue, being at liberty; but how about us
who are kept among madmen! [To Warders] What are you after? Be off!

HEAD DOCTOR. I beg of you to be calm.

PATIENT. But I beg and I demand that you set me free. [Yells, and rushes
at the Doctor, but the Warders seize him. A struggle; after which he is
taken out].

ASSISTANT DOCTOR. There! Now it has begun again. He nearly got at you
that time.

HEAD DOCTOR. Alcoholic ... nothing can be done. But there is some
improvement.

    Enter Adjutant.

ADJUTANT. How d'you do.

HEAD DOCTOR. Good morning!

ADJUTANT. I have brought you an interesting fellow, a certain Prince
Cheremshánov, who has been conscripted, but on religious grounds refuses
to serve. He was sent to the Gendarmes, but they say he does not come
within their jurisdiction, not being a political conspirator. The Priest
exhorted him, but also without effect.

HEAD DOCTOR [laughing] And then as usual you bring him to us, as the
highest Court of Appeal. Well, let's have him.

    Exit Assistant Doctor.

ADJUTANT. He is said to be a highly educated young man, and he is
engaged to a rich girl. It's extraordinary! I really consider this is
the right place for him!

HEAD DOCTOR. Yes, it's a mania.

    Borís is brought in.

HEAD DOCTOR. Glad to see you. Please take a seat and let's have a chat.
[To Adjutant] Please leave us. [Exit Adjutant].

BORÍS. I should like to ask you, if possible, if you mean to lock me up
somewhere, to be so good as to do it quickly and let me rest.

HEAD DOCTOR. Excuse me, we must keep the rules. Only a few questions.
What do you feel? What are you suffering from?

BORÍS. Nothing. I am perfectly well.

HEAD DOCTOR. Yes, but you are not behaving like other people.

BORÍS. I am behaving as my conscience demands.

HEAD DOCTOR. Well, you see you have refused to perform your military
service. On what grounds do you do so?

BORÍS. I am a Christian, and therefore cannot commit murder.

HEAD DOCTOR. But one must defend one's country from her foes, and keep
those who want to destroy the social order from evil-doing.

BORÍS. No one is attacking our country; and there are more among the
governors who destroy social order, than there are among those whom they
oppress.

HEAD DOCTOR. Yes? But what do you mean by that?

BORÍS. I mean this: the chief cause of evil--vódka--is sold by the
Government; false and fraudulent religion is also fostered by the
Government; and this military service which they demand of me--and which
is the chief means of demoralising the people--is also demanded by the
Government.

HEAD DOCTOR. Then, in your opinion, Government and the State are
unnecessary.

BORÍS. That I don't know; but I know for certain that I must take no
part in evil-doing.

HEAD DOCTOR. But what is to become of the world? Is not our reason given
in order to enable us to look ahead.

BORÍS. It is also given in order to enable us to see that social order
should not be maintained by violence, but by goodness; and that one
man's refusal to participate in evil cannot be at all dangerous.

HEAD DOCTOR. Well now, allow me to examine you a bit. Will you have the
goodness to lie down? [Begins touching him] You feel no pain here?

BORÍS. No.

HEAD DOCTOR. Nor here?

BORÍS. No.

HEAD DOCTOR. Take a deep breath, please. Now don't breathe. Now allow me
[takes out a measure and measures forehead and nose]. Now be so good as
to shut your eyes and walk.

BORÍS. Are you not ashamed to do all this?

HEAD DOCTOR. What do you mean?

BORÍS. All this nonsense? You know that I am quite well and that I am
sent here because I refuse to take part in their evil deeds, and because
they have no answer to give to the truth I told them; and that is why
they pretend to think me mad. And you co-operate with them. It is
horrid and it is shameful. Don't do it!

HEAD DOCTOR. Then you don't wish to walk?

BORÍS. No, I don't. You may torture me, but you must do it yourself; I
won't help you. [Hotly] Let me alone! [The Doctor presses button of
bell. Enter two Warders].

HEAD DOCTOR. Don't get excited. I quite understand that your nerves are
strained. Will you please go to your ward?

    Enter Assistant Doctor.

ASSISTANT DOCTOR. Some visitors have just come to see Cheremshánov.

BORÍS. Who are they?

ASSISTANT DOCTOR. Sarýntsov and his daughter.

BORÍS. I should like to see them.

HEAD DOCTOR. There is no reason why you shouldn't. Ask them in. You may
see them here. [Exit, followed by Assistant and Warders].

    Enter Nicholas Ivánovich and Lyúba. The Princess looks in at the
    door and says, "_Go in, I'll come later._"

LYÚBA [goes straight to Borís, takes his head in her hands and kisses
him] Poor Borís.

BORÍS. No, don't pity me. I feel so well, so joyful, so light. How d'you
do. [Kisses Nicholas Ivánovich].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I have come to say chiefly one thing to you. First
of all, in such affairs it is worse to overdo it than not to do enough.
And in this matter you should do as is said in the Gospels, and not
think beforehand, "I shall say this, or do that": "When they deliver you
up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak: for it is not ye that
speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaketh in you." That is to
say, do not act because you have reasoned out beforehand that you should
do so and so, but act only when your whole being feels that you cannot
act otherwise.

BORÍS. I have done so. I did not think I should refuse to serve; but
when I saw all this fraud, those Mirrors of Justice, those Documents,
the Police and Officers smoking, I could not help saying what I did. I
was frightened, but only till I had begun, after that it was all so
simple and joyful.

    Lyúba sits down and cries.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Above all, do nothing for the sake of being praised,
or to gain the approval of those whose opinion you value. For myself I
can say definitely, that if you take the oath at once, and enter the
service, I shall love and esteem you not less but more than before;
because not the things that take place in the external world are
valuable, but that which goes on within the soul.

BORÍS. Of course, for what happens within the soul must make a change in
the outside world.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, I have said my say. Your mother is here. She
is terribly upset. If you can do what she asks, do it--that is what I
wished to say to you.

    From the corridor outside hysterical weeping is heard. A Lunatic
    rushes in, followed by Warders who drag him out again.

LYÚBA. How terrible! And you will be kept here? [Weeps].

BORÍS. I am not afraid of it, I'm afraid of nothing now! I feel so
happy, the only thing I fear is what you feel about it. Do help me; I am
sure you will!

LYÚBA. Can I be glad about it?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Not glad, that is impossible. I myself am not glad.
I suffer on his account and would gladly take his place, but though I
suffer I yet know that it is well.

LYÚBA. It may be well; but when will they set him free?

BORÍS. No one knows. I do not think of the future. The present is so
good, and you can make it still better.

    Enter the Princess, his mother.

PRINCESS. I can wait no longer! [To Nicholas Ivánovich] Well, have you
persuaded him? Does he agree? Bórya, my darling, you understand, don't
you, what I suffer? For thirty years I have lived but for you; rearing
you, rejoicing in you. And now when everything has been done and is
complete--you suddenly renounce everything. Prison and disgrace! Oh no!
Bórya!

BORÍS. Mamma! Listen to me.

PRINCESS [to Nicholas Ivánovich] Why do you say nothing? You have ruined
him, it is for you to persuade him. It's all very well for you! Lyúba,
do speak to him!

LYÚBA. I cannot!

BORÍS. Mamma, do understand that there are things that are as impossible
as flying; and I cannot serve in the army.

PRINCESS. You think that you can't! Nonsense. Everybody has served and
does serve. You and Nicholas Ivánovich have invented some new sort of
Christianity which is not Christianity, but a devilish doctrine to make
everybody suffer!

BORÍS. As is said in the Gospels!

PRINCESS. Nothing of the kind, or if it is, then all the same it is
stupid. Darling, Bórya, have pity on me. [Throws herself on his neck,
weeps] My whole life has been nothing but sorrow. There was but one ray
of joy, and you are turning it into torture. Bórya--have pity on me!

BORÍS. Mamma, this is terribly hard on me. But I cannot explain it to
you.

PRINCESS. Come now, don't refuse--say you will serve!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Say you will think it over--and do think it over.

BORÍS. Very well then. But you too, Mamma, should have pity on me. It is
hard on me too. [Cries are again heard from the corridor]. You know I'm
in a lunatic asylum, and might really go mad.

    Enter Head Doctor.

HEAD DOCTOR. Madam, this may have very bad consequences. Your son is in
a highly excited condition. I think we must put an end to this
interview. You may call on visiting days--Thursdays and Sundays. Please
come to see him before twelve o'clock.

PRINCESS. Very well, very well, I will go. Bórya, good-bye! Think it
over. Have pity on me and meet me next Thursday with good news!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [shaking hands with Borís] Think it over with God's
help, and as if you knew you were to die to-morrow. Only so will you
decide rightly. Good-bye.

BORÍS [approaching Lyúba] And what do you say to me?

LYÚBA. I cannot lie; and I do not understand why you should torment
yourself and everybody. I do not understand--and can say nothing. [Goes
out weeping. Exeunt all except Borís].

BORÍS [alone] Oh how hard it is! Oh, how hard, Lord help me! [Prays].

    Enter Warders with dressing-gown.

WARDER. Please change.

    Borís puts on dressing-gown.


                                Curtain.




ACT IV


SCENE 1

    In Moscow a year later. A drawing-room in the Sarýntsov's town house
    is prepared for a dance. Footmen are arranging plants round the
    grand piano. Enter Mary Ivánovna in an elegant silk dress, with
    Alexándra Ivánovna.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. A ball? No, Only a dance! A "Juvenile Party" as they once
used to say. My children took part in the Theatricals at the Mákofs, and
have been asked to dances everywhere, so I must return the invitations.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I am afraid Nicholas does not like it.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I can't help it. [To Footmen] Put it here! [To Alexándra
Ivánovna] God knows how glad I should be not to cause him
unpleasantness. But I think he has become much less exacting.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. No, no! Only he does not show it so much. I saw how
upset he was when he went off to his own room after dinner.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. What can I do? After all, people must live. We have seven
children, and if they find no amusement at home, heaven knows what they
may be up to. Anyhow I am quite happy about Lyúba now.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Has he proposed, then?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. As good as proposed. He has spoken to her, and she has
said, Yes!

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. That again will be a terrible blow to Nicholas.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Oh, he knows. He can't help knowing.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. He does not like him.

MARY IVÁNOVNA [to the Footmen] Put the fruit on the side-board. Like
whom? Alexander Mikáylovich? Of course not; because he is a living
negation of all Nicholas's pet theories. A nice pleasant kindly man of
the world. But oh! That terrible night-mare--that affair of Borís
Cheremshánov's. What has happened to him?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Lisa has been to see him. He is still there. She
says he has grown terribly thin, and the Doctors fear for his life or
his reason.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Yes, he is one of the terrible sacrifices caused by
Nicholas's ideas. Why need he have been ruined? I never wished it.

    Enter Pianist.

MARY IVÁNOVNA [to Pianist] Have you come to play?

PIANIST. Yes, I am the pianist.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Please take a seat and wait a little. Won't you have a
cup of tea?

PIANIST [goes to piano] No, thank you!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I never wished it. I liked Bórya, but still he was not a
suitable match for Lyúba--especially after he let himself be carried
away by Nicholas Ivánovich's ideas.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. But still, the strength of his convictions is
astonishing. See what he endures! They tell him that as long as he
persists in refusing to serve, he will either remain where he is or be
sent to the fortress; but his reply is always the same. And yet Lisa
says he is full of joy and even merry!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Fanatic! But here comes Alexander Mikáylovich!

    Enter Alexander Mikáylovich Starkóvsky,[35] an elegant man in
    evening dress.

  [35] Alexander in his Christian name, Mikáylovich (= son of Michael)
  is his patronymic, and Starkóvsky in his surname which is seldom used
  in ordinary social life.

STARKÓVSKY. I am afraid I have come too soon. [Kisses the hands of both
ladies].

MARY IVÁNOVNA. So much the better.

STARKÓVSKY. And Lyúbov Nikoláyevna?[36] She proposed to dance a great
deal so as to make up for the time she has lost, and I have undertaken
to help her.

  [36] Lyúbov Nikoláyevna (= Love daughter of Nicholas) is the courteous
  way of naming Lyúba. The latter is a pet name.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. She is sorting favours for the cotillion.

STARKÓVSKY. I will go and help her, if I may?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Certainly.

    As Starkóvsky is going out he meets Lyúba in evening, but not
    low-necked, dress carrying a cushion with stars and ribbons.

LYÚBA. Ah! here you are. Good! Now you can help me. There are three more
cushions in the drawing-room. Go and fetch them all.

STARKÓVSKY. I fly to do so!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Now, Lyúba; friends are coming, and they will be sure to
hint and ask questions. May we announce it?

LYÚBA. No, Mamma, no. Why? Let them ask! Papa will not like it.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But he knows or guesses; and he will have to be told
sooner or later. I think it would be better to announce it to-day. Why,
_C'est le secret de la comédie_.[37]

  [37] It is only a comedy secret.

LYÚBA. No, no, Mamma, please don't. It would spoil our whole evening.
No, no, you must not.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Well, as you please.

LYÚBA. All right then: after the dance, just before supper.

    Enter Starkóvsky.

LYÚBA. Well, have you got them?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I'll go and have a look at the little ones. [Exit with
Alexándra Ivánovna].

STARKÓVSKY [carrying three cushions, which he steadies with his chin,
and dropping things on the way] Don't trouble, Lyúbov Nikoláyevna, I'll
pick them up. Well, you have prepared a lot of favours. If only I can
manage to lead the dance properly! Ványa, come along.

VÁNYA [bringing more favours] This is the whole lot. Lyúba, Alexander
Mikáylovich and I have a bet on, which of us will win the most favours.

STARKÓVSKY. It will be easy for you, for you know everybody here, and
will gain them easily, while I shall have to charm the young ladies
first before winning anything. It means that I am giving you a start of
forty points.

VÁNYA. But then you are a fiancé, and I am a boy.

STARKÓVSKY. Well no, I am not a fiancé yet, and I am worse than a boy.

LYÚBA. Ványa, please go to my room and fetch the gum and the pin-cushion
from the what-not. Only for goodness' sake don't break anything.

VÁNYA. I'll break everything! [Runs off].

STARKÓVSKY [takes Lyúba's hand] Lyúba, may I? I am so happy. [Kisses her
hand] The mazurka is mine, but that is not enough. One can't say much in
a mazurka, and I must speak. May I wire to my people that I have been
accepted and am happy?

LYÚBA. Yes, to-night.

STARKÓVSKY. One word more: how will Nicholas Ivánovich take it? Have you
told him? Yes?

LYÚBA. No, I haven't; but I will. He will take it as he now takes
everything that concerns the family. He will say, "Do as you think
best." But he will be grieved at heart.

STARKÓVSKY. Because I am not Cheremshánov? Because I am a Maréchal de la
Noblesse?

LYÚBA. Yes. But I have struggled with myself and deceived myself for his
sake; and it is not because I love him less that I am now doing not what
he wants, but it is because I can't lie. He himself says so. I do so
want to _live_!

STARKÓVSKY. And life is the only truth! Well, and what of Cheremshánov?

LYÚBA [excitedly] Don't speak of him to me! I wish to blame him, to
blame him whilst he is suffering; and I know it is because I feel guilty
towards him. All I know is that I feel there is a kind of love--and I
think a more real love than I ever felt for him.

STARKÓVSKY. Lyúba, is that true?

LYÚBA. You wish me to say that I love you with that real love--but I
won't say it. I do love you with a different kind of love; but it is not
the real thing either! Neither the one nor the other is the real
thing--if only they could be mixed together!

STARKÓVSKY. No, no, I am satisfied with mine. [Kisses her hand] Lyúba!

LYÚBA [pushes him away] No, let us sort these things. They are beginning
to arrive.

    Enter Princess with Tónya and a little girl.

LYÚBA. Mamma will be here in a moment.

PRINCESS. Are we the first?

STARKÓVSKY. Some one must be! I have suggested making a gutta-percha
dummy to be the first arrival!

    Enter Styópa, also Ványa carrying the gum and pin-cushion.

STYÓPA. I expected to see you at the Italian opera last night.

TÓNYA. We were at my Aunt's, sewing for the charity-bazaar.

    Enter Students, Ladies, Mary Ivánovna and a Countess.

COUNTESS. Shan't we see Nicholas Ivánovich?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. No, he never leaves his study to come to our gathering.

STARKÓVSKY. Quadrille, please! [Claps his hands. The dancers take their
places and dance].

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA [approaches Mary Ivánovna] He is terribly agitated.
He has been to see Borís, and he came back and saw there was a ball, and
now he wants to go away! I went up to his door and overheard him talking
to Alexander Petróvich.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Well?

STARKÓVSKY. _Rond des dames. Les cavaliers en avant!_[38]

  [38] Starkóvsky, directing the dance, says: "Ladies form a circle.
  Gentlemen advance!"

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. He has made up his mind that it is impossible for
him to live so, and he is going away.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. What a torment the man is! [Exit].


                                Curtain.


SCENE 2

    Nicholas Ivánovich's room. The dance music is heard in the distance.
    Nicholas Ivánovich has an overcoat on. He puts a letter on the
    table. Alexander Petróvich, dressed in ragged clothes, is with him.

ALEXANDER PETRÓVICH. Don't worry, we can reach the Caucasus without
spending a penny, and there you can settle down.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. We will go by rail as far as Túla, and from thence
on foot. Well, I'm ready. [Puts letter in the middle of the table, and
goes to the door, where he meets Mary Ivánovna] Oh! Why have you come
here?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Why indeed? To prevent your doing a cruel thing. What's
all this for? Why d'you do it?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Why? Because I cannot continue living like this. I
cannot endure this terrible, depraved life.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. It is awful. My life--which I give wholly to you and the
children--has all of a sudden become "depraved." [Sees Alexander
Petróvich] _Renvoyez au moins cet homme. Je ne veux pas qu'il soit
témoin de cette conversation._[39]

  [39] At least send that man away. I don't wish him to be a witness of
  our conversation.

ALEXANDER PETRÓVICH. _Comprenez. Toujours moi partez._[40]

  [40] Alexander Petróvich replies in very bad French: "I understand! I
  am always to go away!"

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Wait for me out there, Alexander Petróvich, I'll
come in a minute.

    Exit Alexander Petróvich.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. And what can you have in common with such a man as that?
Why is he nearer to you than your own wife? It is incomprehensible! And
where are you going?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I have left a letter for you. I did not want to
speak; it is too hard; but if you wish it, I will try to say it quietly.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. No, I don't understand. Why do you hate and torture your
wife, who has given up everything for you? Tell me, have I been going to
balls, or gone in for dress, or flirted? My whole life has been devoted
to the family. I nursed them all myself; I brought them up, and this
last year the whole weight of their education, and the managing our
affairs, has fallen on me....

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [interrupting] But all this weight falls on you,
because you do not wish to live as I proposed.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But that was impossible! Ask anyone! It was impossible to
let the children grow up illiterate, as you wished them to do, and for
me to do the washing and cooking.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I never wanted that!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Well, anyhow it was something of that kind! No, you are a
Christian, you wish to do good, and you say you love men; then why do
you torture the woman who has devoted her whole life to you?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. How do I torture you? I love you, but ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But is it not torturing me to leave me and to go away?
What will everybody say? One of two things, either that I am a bad
woman, or that you are mad.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Well, let us say I am mad; but I can't live like
this.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But what is there so terrible in it, even if once in a
winter (and only once, because I feared you would not like it) I do give
a party--and even then a very simple one, only ask Mánya and Barbara
Vasílyevna! Everybody said I could not do less--and that it was
absolutely necessary. And now it seems even a crime, for which I shall
have to suffer disgrace. And not only disgrace. The worst of all is that
you no longer love me! You love everyone else--the whole world,
including that drunken Alexander Petróvich--but I still love you and
cannot live without you. Why do you do it? Why? [Weeps].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. But you don't even wish to understand my life; my
spiritual life.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I do wish to understand it, but I can't. I see that your
Christianity has made you hate your family and hate me; but I don't
understand why!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. You see the others do understand!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Who? Alexander Petróvich, who gets money out of you?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. He and others: Tónya and Vasíly Nikonórovich. But
even if nobody understood it, that would make no difference.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Vasíly Nikonórovich has repented, and has got his living
back, and Tónya is at this very moment dancing and flirting with Styópa.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. I am sorry to hear it, but it does not turn black
into white, and it cannot change my life. Mary! You do not need me. Let
me go! I have tried to share your life and to bring into it what for me
constitutes the whole of life; but it is impossible. It only results in
torturing myself and you. I not only torment myself, but spoil the work
I try to accomplish. Everybody, including that very Alexander Petróvich,
has the right to tell me that I am a hypocrite; that I talk but do not
act! That I preach the Gospel of poverty while I live in luxury,
pretending that I have given up everything to my wife!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. So you are ashamed of what people say? Really, can't you
rise above that?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. It's not that I am ashamed (though I am ashamed),
but that I am spoiling God's work.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. You yourself often say that it fulfils itself despite
man's opposition; but that's not the point. Tell me, what do you want of
me?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Haven't I told you?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But, Nicholas, you know that that is impossible. Only
think, Lyúba is now getting married; Ványa is entering the university;
Missy and Kátya are studying. How can I break all that off?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Then what am I to do?

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Do as you say one should do: have patience, love. Is it
too hard for you? Only bear with us and do not take yourself from us!
Come, what is it that torments you?

    Enter Ványa running.

VÁNYA. Mamma, they are calling you!

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Tell them I can't come. Go, go!

VÁNYA. Do come! [He runs off].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. You don't wish to see eye to eye--nor to understand
me.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. It is not that I don't wish to, but that I can't.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No, you don't wish to, and we drift further and
further apart. Only enter into my feelings; put yourself for a moment in
my place, and you will understand. First, the whole life here is
thoroughly depraved. You are vexed with the expression, but I can give
no other name to a life built wholly on robbery; for the money you live
on is taken from the land you have stolen from the peasants. Moreover, I
see that this life is demoralising the children: "Whoso shall cause one
of these little ones to stumble," and I see how they are perishing and
becoming depraved before my very eyes. I cannot bear it when grown-up
men dressed up in swallow-tail coats serve us as if they were slaves.
Every dinner we have is a torture to me.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. But all this was so before. Is it not done by
everyone--both here and abroad?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. But _I_ can't do it. Since I realised that we are
all brothers, I cannot see it without suffering.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. That is as you please. One can invent anything.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [hotly] It's just this want of understanding that is
so terrible. Take for instance to-day! I spent this morning at Rzhánov's
lodging-house, among the outcasts there; and I saw an infant literally
die of hunger; a boy suffering from alcoholism; and a consumptive
charwoman rinsing clothes outside in the cold. Then I returned home, and
a footman with a white tie opens the door for me. I see my son--a mere
lad--ordering that footman to fetch him some water; and I see the army
of servants who work for us. Then I go to visit Borís--a man who is
sacrificing his life for truth's sake. I see how he, a pure, strong,
resolute man, is deliberately being goaded to lunacy and to
destruction, that the Government may be rid of him! I know, and they
know, that his heart is weak, and so they provoke him, and drag him to a
ward for raving lunatics. It is too dreadful, too dreadful. And when I
come home, I hear that the one member of our family who understood--not
me but the truth--has thrown over both her betrothed to whom she had
promised her love, and the truth, and is going to marry a lackey, a
liar ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA. How very Christian!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Yes, it is wrong of me, and I am to blame, but I
only want you to put yourself in my place. I mean to say that she has
turned from the truth ...

MARY IVÁNOVNA. You say, "from the truth"; but other people--the
majority--say from "an error." You see Vasíly Nikonórovich once thought
he was in error, but now has come back to the Church.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. That's impossible ----

MARY IVÁNOVNA. He has written to Lisa! She will show you the letter.
That sort of conversion is very unstable. So also in Tónya's case; I
won't even speak of that fellow Alexander Petróvich, who simply
considers it profitable!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [getting angry] Well, no matter. I only ask _you_ to
understand me. I still consider that truth is truth! All this hurts me
very much. And here at home I see a Christmas-tree, a ball, and hundreds
of roubles being spent while men are dying of hunger. I cannot live so.
Have pity on me, I am worried to death. Let me go! Good-bye.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. If you go, I will go with you. Or if not with you, I will
throw myself under the train you leave by; and let them all go to
perdition--and Missy and Kátya too. Oh my God, my God. What torture!
Why? What for? [Weeps].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [at the door] Alexander Petróvich, go home! I am not
going. [To his wife] Very well, I will stay. [Takes off his overcoat].

MARY IVÁNOVNA [embracing him] We have not much longer to live. Don't let
us spoil everything after twenty-eight years of life together. Well,
I'll give no more parties; but do not punish me so.

    Enter Ványa and Kátya running.

VÁNYA and KATYA. Mamma, be quick--come.

MARY IVÁNOVNA. Coming, coming. So let us forgive one another! [Exit with
Kátya and Ványa].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. A child, a regular child; or a cunning woman? No, a
cunning child. Yes, yes. It seems Thou dost not wish me to be Thy
servant in this Thy work. Thou wishest me to be humiliated, so that
everyone may point his finger at me and say, "He preaches, but he does
not perform." Well, let them! Thou knowest best what Thou requirest:
submission, humility! Ah, if I could but rise to that height!

    Enter Lisa.

LISA. Excuse me. I have brought you a letter from Vasíly Nikonórovich.
It is addressed to me, but he asks me to tell you.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Can it be really true?

LISA. Yes. Shall I read it?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Please do.

LISA [reading] "I write to beg you to communicate this to Nicholas
Ivánovich. I greatly regret the error which led me openly to stray from
the Holy Orthodox Church, to which I rejoice to have now returned. I
hope you and Nicholas Ivánovich will follow the same path. Please
forgive me!"

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. They have tortured him into this, poor fellow. But
still it is terrible.

LISA. I also came to tell you that the Princess is here. She came
upstairs to me in a dreadfully excited state and is determined to see
you. She has just been to see Borís. I think you had better not see
her. What good can it do for her to see you?

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. No. Call her in. Evidently this is fated to be a day
of dreadful torture.

LISA. Then I'll go and call her. [Exit].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [alone] Yes--could I but remember that life consists
only in serving Thee; and that if Thou sendest a trial, it is because
Thou holdest me capable of enduring it, and knowest that my strength is
equal to it: else it would not be a trial.... Father, help me--help me
to do Thy will.

    Enter Princess.

PRINCESS. You receive me? You do me that honour? My respects to you. I
don't give you my hand, for I hate you and despise you.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. What has happened?

PRINCESS. Just this, that they are moving him to the Disciplinary
Battalion; and it is you who are the cause of it.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Princess, if you want anything, tell me what it is;
but if you have come here merely to abuse me, you only injure yourself.
You cannot offend me, for with my whole heart I sympathise with you and
pity you!

PRINCESS. What charity! What exalted Christianity! No, Mr. Sarýntsov,
you cannot deceive me! We know you now. You have ruined my son, but you
don't care; and you go giving balls; and your daughter--my son's
betrothed--is to be married and make a good match, that you approve of;
while you pretend to lead a simple life, and go carpentering. How
repulsive you are to me, with your new-fangled Pharisaism.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Don't excite yourself so, Princess. Tell me what you
have come for--surely it was not simply to scold me?

PRINCESS. Yes, that too! I must find vent for all this accumulated
pain. But what I want is this: He is being removed to the Disciplinary
Battalion, and I cannot bear it. It is you who have done it. You! You!
You!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Not I, but God. And God knows how sorry I am for
you. Do not resist this will. He wants to test you. Bear the trial
meekly.

PRINCESS. I cannot bear it meekly. My whole life was wrapped up in my
son; and you have taken him from me and ruined him. I cannot be calm. I
have come to you--it is my last attempt to tell you that you have ruined
him and that it is for you to save him. Go and prevail on them to set
him free. Go and see the Governor-General, the Emperor, or whom you
please. It is your duty to do it. If you don't do it, I know what I
shall do. You will have to answer to me for it!

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Teach me what to do. I am ready to do anything.

PRINCESS. I again repeat it--you must save him! If you do not--beware!
Good-bye. [Exit].

    Nicholas Ivánovich (alone). Lies down on sofa. Silence. The door
    opens and the dance music sounds louder. Enter Styópa.

STYÓPA. Papa is not here, come in!

    Enter the adults and the children, dancing in couples.

LYÚBA [noticing Nicholas Ivánovich] Ah, you _are_ here. Excuse us.

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH [rising] Never mind. [Exit dancing couples].

NICHOLAS IVÁNOVICH. Vasíly Nikonórovich has recanted. I have ruined
Borís. Lyúba is getting married. Can it be that I have been mistaken?
Mistaken in believing in Thee? No! Father help me!


                                Curtain.




Tolstoy left the following notes for a fifth act which was never
written.




ACT V

Disciplinary Battalion. A cell. Prisoners sitting and lying. Borís is
reading the Gospel and explaining it. A man who has been flogged is
brought in. "Ah, if there were but a Pugachev[41] to revenge us on such
as you." The Princess bursts in, but is turned out. Conflict with an
officer. Prisoners led to prayers. Borís sent to the Penitentiary Cell:
"He shall be flogged!"

  [41] Pugachev was the leader of a formidable rebellion in Russia in
  the eighteenth century.


Scene changes.

The Tsar's Cabinet. Cigarettes; jokes; caresses. The Princess is
announced. "Let her wait." Enter petitioners, flattery, then the
Princess. Her request is refused. Exit.


Scene changes.

Mary Ivánovna talks about illness with the doctor. "He has changed, has
become more gentle, but is dispirited." Enter Nicholas Ivánovich and
speaks to Doctor about the uselessness of treatment. But for his wife's
sake he agrees to it. Enter Tónya with Styópa. Lyúba with Starkóvsky.
Conversation about land. Nicholas Ivánovich tries not to offend them.
Exeunt all. Nicholas Ivánovich with Lisa. "I am always in doubt whether
I have done right. I have accomplished nothing. Borís has perished,
Vasíly Nikonórovich has recanted. I set an example of weakness.
Evidently God does not wish me to be his servant. He has many other
servants--and can accomplish his will without me, and he who realises
this is at peace." Exit Lisa. He prays. The Princess rushes in and
shoots him. Everybody comes running into the room. He says he did it
himself by accident. He writes a petition to the Emperor. Enter Vasíly
Nikonórovich with Doukhobors.[42] Dies rejoicing that the fraud of the
Church is exposed, and that he has understood the meaning of his life.

  [42] Tolstoy did not fully realise the facts (described in _A Peculiar
  People_) of the Doukhobors' submission to their leader, or of their
  belief in him as an incarnation of the Deity. In fact, when he wrote
  this play, Tolstoy regarded the Doukhobors as a type of what all
  Christians should be.

_This play was begun in the 'eighties, and continued in 1900 and 1902._


                 END OF "THE LIGHT SHINES IN DARKNESS."



[ Transcriber's Note:

  The following is a list of corrections made to the original. The first
  line is the original line, the second the corrected one.

    forty-five; and her husband, Peter Semyónovich Kóhovstsef, a fat
    forty-five; and her husband, Peter Semyónovich Kóhovtsef, a fat

    on the verandah at a table with a samovar and coffee-pot. Mary
    on the verandah at a table with a samovár and coffee-pot. Mary

  [9] He was very nice, and like everybody else
  [9] He was very nice, and like everybody else.

is your duty as a mother to _prendre tes mésures_.[11]
is your duty as a mother to _prendre tes mesures_.[11]

MARY IVÁNOVNA. I'm coming, coming? [Rises and exit].
MARY IVÁNOVNA. I'm coming, coming! [Rises and exit].

for vodka, and abandon our own families.
for vódka, and abandon our own families?

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Re-heat the samovar, please.
ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. Re-heat the samovár, please.

ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I should think they also need this samovar.
ALEXÁNDRA IVÁNOVNA. I should think they also need this samovár.

other 44,990 trees will very soon be cut down also.
  There are 449,990 trees remaining. This might either be a typesetting
  mistake or an error made by Styópa.

can be proved historically; there is but one irrefragible proof....
can be proved historically; there is but one irrefragable proof....

PRIEST. How can we trust in it, when there are contradictions.
PRIEST. How can we trust in it, when there are contradictions?

    [Enter Nurse].
    Enter Nurse.

coming
coming!

LYÚBA. Yes, do, and I'll go and wake Lisa and Tánya.
LYÚBA. Yes, do, and I'll go and wake Lisa and Tónya.

what I feel. (To Tónya) If what I say should offend you--who are our
what I feel. [To Tónya] If what I say should offend you--who are our

SCENE 2.  [in ACT II]
SCENE 2

STARKÓVSKY. And Lyubóv Nikoláyevna?[36] She proposed to dance a great
STARKÓVSKY. And Lyúbov Nikoláyevna?[36] She proposed to dance a great

  [36] Lyúbov Nikolávna (= Love daughter of Nicholas) is the courteous
  [36] Lyúbov Nikoláyevna (= Love daughter of Nicholas) is the courteous
]





End of Project Gutenberg's The Light Shines in Darkness, by Leo Tolstoy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIGHT SHINES IN DARKNESS ***

***** This file should be named 26666-8.txt or 26666-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/6/26666/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
